The Project Gutenberg eBook of Relativity: The Special and General Theory


This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

Title: Relativity: The Special and General Theory

Author: Albert Einstein

Translator: Robert W. Lawson



Release date: October 1, 2009 [eBook #30155]

Most recently updated: May 2, 2023

Language: English

Original publication: Methuen & Co Ltd,, 1924

Credits: Robert Hux



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RELATIVITY: THE SPECIAL AND GENERAL THEORY ***





Relativity: The Special and General Theory



by Albert Einstein


Authorised Translation by Robert W. Lawson




* * *




ALBERT EINSTEIN REFERENCE ARCHIVE

RELATIVITY: THE SPECIAL AND GENERAL THEORY

BY ALBERT EINSTEIN





Written: 1916 (this revised edition: 1924)

Source: Relativity: The Special and General Theory (1920)

Publisher: Methuen & Co Ltd

First Published: December, 1916

Translated: Robert W. Lawson (Authorised translation)

Transcription/Markup: Brian Basgen

Transcription to text: Gregory B. Newby

Thanks to: Einstein Reference Archive (marxists.org)

The Einstein Reference Archive is online at:

http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/einstein/index.htm





Contents


Preface





Part I: The Special Theory of Relativity

I. Physical Meaning of Geometrical Propositions

II. The System of Co-ordinates

III. Space and Time in Classical Mechanics

IV. The Galileian System of Co-ordinates

V. The Principle of Relativity (in the Restricted Sense)

VI. The Theorem of the Addition of Velocities employed in Classical Mechanics

VII. The Apparent Incompatability of the Law of Propagation of Light with the Principle of Relativity

VIII. On the Idea of Time in Physics

IX. The Relativity of Simultaneity

X. On the Relativity of the Conception of Distance

XI. The Lorentz Transformation

XII. The Behaviour of Measuring-Rods and Clocks in Motion

XIII. Theorem of the Addition of Velocities. The Experiment of Fizeau

XIV. The Heuristic Value of the Theory of Relativity

XV. General Results of the Theory

XVI. Experience and the Special Theory of Relativity

XVII. Minkowski’s Four-dimensional Space





Part II: The General Theory of Relativity

XVIII. Special and General Principle of Relativity

XIX. The Gravitational Field

XX. The Equality of Inertial and Gravitational Mass as an Argument for the General Postulate of Relativity

XXI. In What Respects are the Foundations of Classical Mechanics and of the Special Theory of Relativity Unsatisfactory?

XXII. A Few Inferences from the General Principle of Relativity

XXIII. Behaviour of Clocks and Measuring-Rods on a Rotating Body of Reference

XXIV. Euclidean and non-Euclidean Continuum

XXV. Gaussian Co-ordinates

XXVI. The Space-Time Continuum of the Special Theory of Relativity Considered as a Euclidean Continuum

XXVII. The Space-Time Continuum of the General Theory of Relativity is Not a Euclidean Continuum

XXVIII. Exact Formulation of the General Principle of Relativity

XXIX. The Solution of the Problem of Gravitation on the Basis of the General Principle of Relativity





Part III: Considerations on the Universe as a Whole

XXX. Cosmological Difficulties of Newton’s Theory

XXXI. The Possibility of a “Finite” and yet “Unbounded” Universe

XXXII. The Structure of Space According to the General Theory of Relativity





Appendices:

I. Simple Derivation of the Lorentz Transformation (supplementary to section XI)

II. Minkowski’s Four-Dimensional Space (“World”) (supplementary to section XVII)

III. The Experimental Confirmation of the General Theory of Relativity

IV. The Structure of Space According to the General Theory of Relativity (supplementary to section XXXII)

V. Relativity and the Problem of Space

Note: The fifth Appendix was added by Einstein at the time of the fifteenth re-printing of this book; and as a result is still under copyright restrictions so cannot be added without the permission of the publisher.





PREFACE


The present book is intended, as far as possible, to give an exact insight into the theory of Relativity to those readers who, from a general scientific and philosophical point of view, are interested in the theory, but who are not conversant with the mathematical apparatus of theoretical physics. The work presumes a standard of education corresponding to that of a university matriculation examination, and, despite the shortness of the book, a fair amount of patience and force of will on the part of the reader. The author has spared himself no pains in his endeavour to present the main ideas in the simplest and most intelligible form, and on the whole, in the sequence and connection in which they actually originated. In the interest of clearness, it appeared to me inevitable that I should repeat myself frequently, without paying the slightest attention to the elegance of the presentation. I adhered scrupulously to the precept of that brilliant theoretical physicist L. Boltzmann, according to whom matters of elegance ought to be left to the tailor and to the cobbler. I make no pretence of having withheld from the reader difficulties which are inherent to the subject. On the other hand, I have purposely treated the empirical physical foundations of the theory in a “step-motherly” fashion, so that readers unfamiliar with physics may not feel like the wanderer who was unable to see the forest for the trees. May the book bring some one a few happy hours of suggestive thought!

December, 1916

A. EINSTEIN





PART I: THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY





I.

PHYSICAL MEANING OF GEOMETRICAL PROPOSITIONS


In your schooldays most of you who read this book made acquaintance with the noble building of Euclid’s geometry, and you remember—perhaps with more respect than love—the magnificent structure, on the lofty staircase of which you were chased about for uncounted hours by conscientious teachers. By reason of our past experience, you would certainly regard everyone with disdain who should pronounce even the most out-of-the-way proposition of this science to be untrue. But perhaps this feeling of proud certainty would leave you immediately if some one were to ask you: “What, then, do you mean by the assertion that these propositions are true?” Let us proceed to give this question a little consideration.

Geometry sets out from certain conceptions such as “plane,” “point,” and “straight line,” with which we are able to associate more or less definite ideas, and from certain simple propositions (axioms) which, in virtue of these ideas, we are inclined to accept as “true.” Then, on the basis of a logical process, the justification of which we feel ourselves compelled to admit, all remaining propositions are shown to follow from those axioms, i.e. they are proven. A proposition is then correct (“true”) when it has been derived in the recognised manner from the axioms. The question of “truth” of the individual geometrical propositions is thus reduced to one of the “truth” of the axioms. Now it has long been known that the last question is not only unanswerable by the methods of geometry, but that it is in itself entirely without meaning. We cannot ask whether it is true that only one straight line goes through two points. We can only say that Euclidean geometry deals with things called “straight lines,” to each of which is ascribed the property of being uniquely determined by two points situated on it. The concept “true” does not tally with the assertions of pure geometry, because by the word “true” we are eventually in the habit of designating always the correspondence with a “real” object; geometry, however, is not concerned with the relation of the ideas involved in it to objects of experience, but only with the logical connection of these ideas among themselves.

It is not difficult to understand why, in spite of this, we feel constrained to call the propositions of geometry “true.” Geometrical ideas correspond to more or less exact objects in nature, and these last are undoubtedly the exclusive cause of the genesis of those ideas. Geometry ought to refrain from such a course, in order to give to its structure the largest possible logical unity. The practice, for example, of seeing in a “distance” two marked positions on a practically rigid body is something which is lodged deeply in our habit of thought. We are accustomed further to regard three points as being situated on a straight line, if their apparent positions can be made to coincide for observation with one eye, under suitable choice of our place of observation.

If, in pursuance of our habit of thought, we now supplement the propositions of Euclidean geometry by the single proposition that two points on a practically rigid body always correspond to the same distance (line-interval), independently of any changes in position to which we may subject the body, the propositions of Euclidean geometry then resolve themselves into propositions on the possible relative position of practically rigid bodies.[1] Geometry which has been supplemented in this way is then to be treated as a branch of physics. We can now legitimately ask as to the “truth” of geometrical propositions interpreted in this way, since we are justified in asking whether these propositions are satisfied for those real things we have associated with the geometrical ideas. In less exact terms we can express this by saying that by the “truth” of a geometrical proposition in this sense we understand its validity for a construction with rule and compasses.



[1]

It follows that a natural object is associated also with a straight line. Three points A, B and C on a rigid body thus lie in a straight line when the points A and C being given, B is chosen such that the sum of the distances AB and BC is as short as possible. This incomplete suggestion will suffice for the present purpose.

Of course the conviction of the “truth” of geometrical propositions in this sense is founded exclusively on rather incomplete experience. For the present we shall assume the “truth” of the geometrical propositions, then at a later stage (in the general theory of relativity) we shall see that this “truth” is limited, and we shall consider the extent of its limitation.





II.

THE SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES


On the basis of the physical interpretation of distance which has been indicated, we are also in a position to establish the distance between two points on a rigid body by means of measurements. For this purpose we require a “distance” (rod S) which is to be used once and for all, and which we employ as a standard measure. If, now, A and B are two points on a rigid body, we can construct the line joining them according to the rules of geometry; then, starting from A, we can mark off the distance S time after time until we reach B. The number of these operations required is the numerical measure of the distance AB. This is the basis of all measurement of length.[2]



[2]

Here we have assumed that there is nothing left over i.e. that the measurement gives a whole number. This difficulty is got over by the use of divided measuring-rods, the introduction of which does not demand any fundamentally new method.

Every description of the scene of an event or of the position of an object in space is based on the specification of the point on a rigid body (body of reference) with which that event or object coincides. This applies not only to scientific description, but also to everyday life. If I analyse the place specification “Trafalgar Square, London”[3] I arrive at the following result. The earth is the rigid body to which the specification of place refers; “Trafalgar Square, London” is a well-defined point, to which a name has been assigned, and with which the event coincides in space.[4]



[3]

I have chosen this as being more familiar to the English reader than the “Potzdammer Platz, Berlin,” which is referred to in the original. (R. W. L.)



[4]

It is not necessary here to investigate further the significance of the expression “coincidence in space.” This conception is sufficiently obvious to ensure that differences of opinion are scarcely likely to arise as to its applicability in practice.

This primitive method of place specification deals only with places on the surface of rigid bodies, and is dependent on the existence of points on this surface which are distinguishable from each other. But we can free ourselves from both of these limitations without altering the nature of our specification of position. If, for instance, a cloud is hovering over Trafalgar Square, then we can determine its position relative to the surface of the earth by erecting a pole perpendicularly on the Square, so that it reaches the cloud. The length of the pole measured with the standard measuring-rod, combined with the specification of the position of the foot of the pole, supplies us with a complete place specification. On the basis of this illustration, we are able to see the manner in which a refinement of the conception of position has been developed.

(a) We imagine the rigid body, to which the place specification is referred, supplemented in such a manner that the object whose position we require is reached by the completed rigid body.

(b) In locating the position of the object, we make use of a number (here the length of the pole measured with the measuring-rod) instead of designated points of reference.

(c) We speak of the height of the cloud even when the pole which reaches the cloud has not been erected. By means of optical observations of the cloud from different positions on the ground, and taking into account the properties of the propagation of light, we determine the length of the pole we should have required in order to reach the cloud.

From this consideration we see that it will be advantageous if, in the description of position, it should be possible by means of numerical measures to make ourselves independent of the existence of marked positions (possessing names) on the rigid body of reference. In the physics of measurement this is attained by the application of the Cartesian system of co-ordinates.

This consists of three plane surfaces perpendicular to each other and rigidly attached to a rigid body. Referred to a system of co-ordinates, the scene of any event will be determined (for the main part) by the specification of the lengths of the three perpendiculars or co-ordinates (x, y, z) which can be dropped from the scene of the event to those three plane surfaces. The lengths of these three perpendiculars can be determined by a series of manipulations with rigid measuring-rods performed according to the rules and methods laid down by Euclidean geometry.

In practice, the rigid surfaces which constitute the system of co-ordinates are generally not available; furthermore, the magnitudes of the co-ordinates are not actually determined by constructions with rigid rods, but by indirect means. If the results of physics and astronomy are to maintain their clearness, the physical meaning of specifications of position must always be sought in accordance with the above considerations.[5]



[5]

A refinement and modification of these views does not become necessary until we come to deal with the general theory of relativity, treated in the second part of this book.

We thus obtain the following result: Every description of events in space involves the use of a rigid body to which such events have to be referred. The resulting relationship takes for granted that the laws of Euclidean geometry hold for “distances;” the “distance” being represented physically by means of the convention of two marks on a rigid body.





III.

SPACE AND TIME IN CLASSICAL MECHANICS


The purpose of mechanics is to describe how bodies change their position in space with “time.” I should load my conscience with grave sins against the sacred spirit of lucidity were I to formulate the aims of mechanics in this way, without serious reflection and detailed explanations. Let us proceed to disclose these sins.

It is not clear what is to be understood here by “position” and “space.” I stand at the window of a railway carriage which is travelling uniformly, and drop a stone on the embankment, without throwing it. Then, disregarding the influence of the air resistance, I see the stone descend in a straight line. A pedestrian who observes the misdeed from the footpath notices that the stone falls to earth in a parabolic curve. I now ask: Do the “positions” traversed by the stone lie “in reality” on a straight line or on a parabola? Moreover, what is meant here by motion “in space”? From the considerations of the previous section the answer is self-evident. In the first place we entirely shun the vague word “space,” of which, we must honestly acknowledge, we cannot form the slightest conception, and we replace it by “motion relative to a practically rigid body of reference.” The positions relative to the body of reference (railway carriage or embankment) have already been defined in detail in the preceding section. If instead of “body of reference” we insert “system of co-ordinates,” which is a useful idea for mathematical description, we are in a position to say: The stone traverses a straight line relative to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the carriage, but relative to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the ground (embankment) it describes a parabola. With the aid of this example it is clearly seen that there is no such thing as an independently existing trajectory (lit. “path-curve”[6], but only a trajectory relative to a particular body of reference.



[6]

That is, a curve along which the body moves.

In order to have a complete description of the motion, we must specify how the body alters its position with time; i.e. for every point on the trajectory it must be stated at what time the body is situated there. These data must be supplemented by such a definition of time that, in virtue of this definition, these time-values can be regarded essentially as magnitudes (results of measurements) capable of observation. If we take our stand on the ground of classical mechanics, we can satisfy this requirement for our illustration in the following manner. We imagine two clocks of identical construction; the man at the railway-carriage window is holding one of them, and the man on the footpath the other. Each of the observers determines the position on his own reference-body occupied by the stone at each tick of the clock he is holding in his hand. In this connection we have not taken account of the inaccuracy involved by the finiteness of the velocity of propagation of light. With this and with a second difficulty prevailing here we shall have to deal in detail later.





IV.

THE GALILEIAN SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES


As is well known, the fundamental law of the mechanics of Galilei-Newton, which is known as the law of inertia, can be stated thus: A body removed sufficiently far from other bodies continues in a state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line. This law not only says something about the motion of the bodies, but it also indicates the reference-bodies or systems of coordinates, permissible in mechanics, which can be used in mechanical description. The visible fixed stars are bodies for which the law of inertia certainly holds to a high degree of approximation. Now if we use a system of co-ordinates which is rigidly attached to the earth, then, relative to this system, every fixed star describes a circle of immense radius in the course of an astronomical day, a result which is opposed to the statement of the law of inertia. So that if we adhere to this law we must refer these motions only to systems of coordinates relative to which the fixed stars do not move in a circle. A system of co-ordinates of which the state of motion is such that the law of inertia holds relative to it is called a “Galileian system of co-ordinates.” The laws of the mechanics of Galilei-Newton can be regarded as valid only for a Galileian system of co-ordinates.





V.

THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY (IN THE RESTRICTED SENSE)


In order to attain the greatest possible clearness, let us return to our example of the railway carriage supposed to be travelling uniformly. We call its motion a uniform translation (“uniform” because it is of constant velocity and direction, “translation” because although the carriage changes its position relative to the embankment yet it does not rotate in so doing). Let us imagine a raven flying through the air in such a manner that its motion, as observed from the embankment, is uniform and in a straight line. If we were to observe the flying raven from the moving railway carriage. we should find that the motion of the raven would be one of different velocity and direction, but that it would still be uniform and in a straight line. Expressed in an abstract manner we may say: If a mass m is moving uniformly in a straight line with respect to a co-ordinate system K, then it will also be moving uniformly and in a straight line relative to a second co-ordinate system K′ provided that the latter is executing a uniform translatory motion with respect to K. In accordance with the discussion contained in the preceding section, it follows that:

If K is a Galileian co-ordinate system. then every other co-ordinate system K′ is a Galileian one, when, in relation to K, it is in a condition of uniform motion of translation. Relative to K′ the mechanical laws of Galilei-Newton hold good exactly as they do with respect to K.

We advance a step farther in our generalisation when we express the tenet thus: If, relative to K, K′ is a uniformly moving co-ordinate system devoid of rotation, then natural phenomena run their course with respect to K′ according to exactly the same general laws as with respect to K. This statement is called the principle of relativity (in the restricted sense).

As long as one was convinced that all natural phenomena were capable of representation with the help of classical mechanics, there was no need to doubt the validity of this principle of relativity. But in view of the more recent development of electrodynamics and optics it became more and more evident that classical mechanics affords an insufficient foundation for the physical description of all natural phenomena. At this juncture the question of the validity of the principle of relativity became ripe for discussion, and it did not appear impossible that the answer to this question might be in the negative.

Nevertheless, there are two general facts which at the outset speak very much in favour of the validity of the principle of relativity. Even though classical mechanics does not supply us with a sufficiently broad basis for the theoretical presentation of all physical phenomena, still we must grant it a considerable measure of “truth,” since it supplies us with the actual motions of the heavenly bodies with a delicacy of detail little short of wonderful. The principle of relativity must therefore apply with great accuracy in the domain of mechanics. But that a principle of such broad generality should hold with such exactness in one domain of phenomena, and yet should be invalid for another, is a priori not very probable.

We now proceed to the second argument, to which, moreover, we shall return later. If the principle of relativity (in the restricted sense) does not hold, then the Galileian co-ordinate systems K, K′, K″, etc., which are moving uniformly relative to each other, will not be equivalent for the description of natural phenomena. In this case we should be constrained to believe that natural laws are capable of being formulated in a particularly simple manner, and of course only on condition that, from amongst all possible Galileian co-ordinate systems, we should have chosen one (K0) of a particular state of motion as our body of reference. We should then be justified (because of its merits for the description of natural phenomena) in calling this system “absolutely at rest,” and all other Galileian systems K “in motion.” If, for instance, our embankment were the system K0 then our railway carriage would be a system K, relative to which less simple laws would hold than with respect to K0. This diminished simplicity would be due to the fact that the carriage K would be in motion (i.e. “really”)with respect to K0. In the general laws of nature which have been formulated with reference to K, the magnitude and direction of the velocity of the carriage would necessarily play a part. We should expect, for instance, that the note emitted by an organpipe placed with its axis parallel to the direction of travel would be different from that emitted if the axis of the pipe were placed perpendicular to this direction.

Now in virtue of its motion in an orbit round the sun, our earth is comparable with a railway carriage travelling with a velocity of about 30 kilometres per second. If the principle of relativity were not valid we should therefore expect that the direction of motion of the earth at any moment would enter into the laws of nature, and also that physical systems in their behaviour would be dependent on the orientation in space with respect to the earth. For owing to the alteration in direction of the velocity of revolution of the earth in the course of a year, the earth cannot be at rest relative to the hypothetical system K0 throughout the whole year. However, the most careful observations have never revealed such anisotropic properties in terrestrial physical space, i.e. a physical non-equivalence of different directions. This is very powerful argument in favour of the principle of relativity.





VI.

THE THEOREM OF THE ADDITION OF VELOCITIES EMPLOYED IN CLASSICAL MECHANICS


Let us suppose our old friend the railway carriage to be travelling along the rails with a constant velocity v, and that a man traverses the length of the carriage in the direction of travel with a velocity w. How quickly or, in other words, with what velocity W does the man advance relative to the embankment during the process? The only possible answer seems to result from the following consideration: If the man were to stand still for a second, he would advance relative to the embankment through a distance v equal numerically to the velocity of the carriage. As a consequence of his walking, however, he traverses an additional distance w relative to the carriage, and hence also relative to the embankment, in this second, the distance w being numerically equal to the velocity with which he is walking. Thus in total he covers the distance W = v + w relative to the embankment in the second considered. We shall see later that this result, which expresses the theorem of the addition of velocities employed in classical mechanics, cannot be maintained; in other words, the law that we have just written down does not hold in reality. For the time being, however, we shall assume its correctness.





VII.

THE APPARENT INCOMPATIBILITY OF THE LAW OF PROPAGATION OF LIGHT WITH THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY


There is hardly a simpler law in physics than that according to which light is propagated in empty space. Every child at school knows, or believes he knows, that this propagation takes place in straight lines with a velocity c = 300,000 km./sec. At all events we know with great exactness that this velocity is the same for all colours, because if this were not the case, the minimum of emission would not be observed simultaneously for different colours during the eclipse of a fixed star by its dark neighbour. By means of similar considerations based on observations of double stars, the Dutch astronomer De Sitter was also able to show that the velocity of propagation of light cannot depend on the velocity of motion of the body emitting the light. The assumption that this velocity of propagation is dependent on the direction “in space” is in itself improbable.

In short, let us assume that the simple law of the constancy of the velocity of light c (in vacuum) is justifiably believed by the child at school. Who would imagine that this simple law has plunged the conscientiously thoughtful physicist into the greatest intellectual difficulties? Let us consider how these difficulties arise.

Of course we must refer the process of the propagation of light (and indeed every other process) to a rigid reference-body (co-ordinate system). As such a system let us again choose our embankment. We shall imagine the air above it to have been removed. If a ray of light be sent along the embankment, we see from the above that the tip of the ray will be transmitted with the velocity c relative to the embankment. Now let us suppose that our railway carriage is again travelling along the railway lines with the velocity v, and that its direction is the same as that of the ray of light, but its velocity of course much less. Let us inquire about the velocity of propagation of the ray of light relative to the carriage. It is obvious that we can here apply the consideration of the previous section, since the ray of light plays the part of the man walking along relatively to the carriage. The velocity W of the man relative to the embankment is here replaced by the velocity of light relative to the embankment. w is the required velocity of light with respect to the carriage, and we have

w = c – v.

The velocity of propagation ot a ray of light relative to the carriage thus comes out smaller than c.

But this result comes into conflict with the principle of relativity set forth in Section V. For, like every other general law of nature, the law of the transmission of light in vacuo [in vacuum] must, according to the principle of relativity, be the same for the railway carriage as reference-body as when the rails are the body of reference. But, from our above consideration, this would appear to be impossible. If every ray of light is propagated relative to the embankment with the velocity c, then for this reason it would appear that another law of propagation of light must necessarily hold with respect to the carriage—a result contradictory to the principle of relativity.

In view of this dilemma there appears to be nothing else for it than to abandon either the principle of relativity or the simple law of the propagation of light in vacuo. Those of you who have carefully followed the preceding discussion are almost sure to expect that we should retain the principle of relativity, which appeals so convincingly to the intellect because it is so natural and simple. The law of the propagation of light in vacuo would then have to be replaced by a more complicated law conformable to the principle of relativity. The development of theoretical physics shows, however, that we cannot pursue this course. The epoch-making theoretical investigations of H. A. Lorentz on the electrodynamical and optical phenomena connected with moving bodies show that experience in this domain leads conclusively to a theory of electromagnetic phenomena, of which the law of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo is a necessary consequence. Prominent theoretical physicists were therefore more inclined to reject the principle of relativity, in spite of the fact that no empirical data had been found which were contradictory to this principle.

At this juncture the theory of relativity entered the arena. As a result of an analysis of the physical conceptions of time and space, it became evident that in reality there is not the least incompatibilitiy between the principle of relativity and the law of propagation of light, and that by systematically holding fast to both these laws a logically rigid theory could be arrived at. This theory has been called the special theory of relativity to distinguish it from the extended theory, with which we shall deal later. In the following pages we shall present the fundamental ideas of the special theory of relativity.





VIII.

ON THE IDEA OF TIME IN PHYSICS


Lightning has struck the rails on our railway embankment at two places A and B far distant from each other. I make the additional assertion that these two lightning flashes occurred simultaneously. If I ask you whether there is sense in this statement, you will answer my question with a decided “Yes.” But if I now approach you with the request to explain to me the sense of the statement more precisely, you find after some consideration that the answer to this question is not so easy as it appears at first sight.

After some time perhaps the following answer would occur to you: “The significance of the statement is clear in itself and needs no further explanation; of course it would require some consideration if I were to be commissioned to determine by observations whether in the actual case the two events took place simultaneously or not.” I cannot be satisfied with this answer for the following reason. Supposing that as a result of ingenious considerations an able meteorologist were to discover that the lightning must always strike the places A and B simultaneously, then we should be faced with the task of testing whether or not this theoretical result is in accordance with the reality. We encounter the same difficulty with all physical statements in which the conception “simultaneous” plays a part. The concept does not exist for the physicist until he has the possibility of discovering whether or not it is fulfilled in an actual case. We thus require a definition of simultaneity such that this definition supplies us with the method by means of which, in the present case, he can decide by experiment whether or not both the lightning strokes occurred simultaneously. As long as this requirement is not satisfied, I allow myself to be deceived as a physicist (and of course the same applies if I am not a physicist), when I imagine that I am able to attach a meaning to the statement of simultaneity. (I would ask the reader not to proceed farther until he is fully convinced on this point.)

After thinking the matter over for some time you then offer the following suggestion with which to test simultaneity. By measuring along the rails, the connecting line AB should be measured up and an observer placed at the mid-point M of the distance AB. This observer should be supplied with an arrangement (e.g. two mirrors inclined at 90°) which allows him visually to observe both places A and B at the same time. If the observer perceives the two flashes of lightning at the same time, then they are simultaneous.

I am very pleased with this suggestion, but for all that I cannot regard the matter as quite settled, because I feel constrained to raise the following objection: “Your definition would certainly be right, if only I knew that the light by means of which the observer at M perceives the lightning flashes travels along the length A → M with the same velocity as along the length B → M. But an examination of this supposition would only be possible if we already had at our disposal the means of measuring time. It would thus appear as though we were moving here in a logical circle.”

After further consideration you cast a somewhat disdainful glance at me—and rightly so—and you declare: “I maintain my previous definition nevertheless, because in reality it assumes absolutely nothing about light. There is only one demand to be made of the definition of simultaneity, namely, that in every real case it must supply us with an empirical decision as to whether or not the conception that has to be defined is fulfilled. That my definition satisfies this demand is indisputable. That light requires the same time to traverse the path A → M as for the path B → M is in reality neither a supposition nor a hypothesis about the physical nature of light, but a stipulation which I can make of my own freewill in order to arrive at a definition of simultaneity.”

It is clear that this definition can be used to give an exact meaning not only to two events, but to as many events as we care to choose, and independently of the positions of the scenes of the events with respect to the body of reference[7] (here the railway embankment). We are thus led also to a definition of “time” in physics. For this purpose we suppose that clocks of identical construction are placed at the points A, B and C of the railway line (co-ordinate system) and that they are set in such a manner that the positions of their pointers are simultaneously (in the above sense) the same. Under these conditions we understand by the “time” of an event the reading (position of the hands) of that one of these clocks which is in the immediate vicinity (in space) of the event. In this manner a time-value is associated with every event which is essentially capable of observation.



[7]

We suppose further that, when three events A, B and C occur in different places in such a manner that, if A is simultaneous with B, and B is simultaneous with C (simultaneous in the sense of the above definition), then the criterion for the simultaneity of the pair of events A, C is also satisfied. This assumption is a physical hypothesis about the law of propagation of light; it must certainly be fulfilled if we are to maintain the law of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo.

This stipulation contains a further physical hypothesis, the validity of which will hardly be doubted without empirical evidence to the contrary. It has been assumed that all these clocks go at the same rate if they are of identical construction. Stated more exactly: When two clocks arranged at rest in different places of a reference-body are set in such a manner that a particular position of the pointers of the one clock is simultaneous (in the above sense) with the same position, of the pointers of the other clock, then identical “settings” are always simultaneous (in the sense of the above definition).





IX.

THE RELATIVITY OF SIMULTANEITY


Up to now our considerations have been referred to a particular body of reference, which we have styled a “railway embankment.” We suppose a very long train travelling along the rails with the constant velocity v and in the direction indicated in Fig 1. People travelling in this train will with a vantage view the train as a rigid reference-body (co-ordinate system); they regard all events in reference to the train. Then every event which takes place along the line also takes place at a particular point of the train. Also the definition of simultaneity can be given relative to the train in exactly the same way as with respect to the embankment. As a natural consequence, however, the following question arises:





Are two events (e.g. the two strokes of lightning A and B) which are simultaneous with reference to the railway embankment also simultaneous relatively to the train? We shall show directly that the answer must be in the negative.

When we say that the lightning strokes A and B are simultaneous with respect to be embankment, we mean: the rays of light emitted at the places A and B, where the lightning occurs, meet each other at the mid-point M of the length A → B of the embankment. But the events A and B also correspond to positions A and B on the train. Let M′ be the mid-point of the distance A → B on the travelling train. Just when the flashes (as judged from the embankment) of lightning occur, this point M′ naturally coincides with the point M but it moves towards the right in the diagram with the velocity v of the train. If an observer sitting in the position M′ in the train did not possess this velocity, then he would remain permanently at M, and the light rays emitted by the flashes of lightning A and B would reach him simultaneously, i.e. they would meet just where he is situated. Now in reality (considered with reference to the railway embankment) he is hastening towards the beam of light coming from B, whilst he is riding on ahead of the beam of light coming from A. Hence the observer will see the beam of light emitted from B earlier than he will see that emitted from A. Observers who take the railway train as their reference-body must therefore come to the conclusion that the lightning flash B took place earlier than the lightning flash A. We thus arrive at the important result:

Events which are simultaneous with reference to the embankment are not simultaneous with respect to the train, and vice versa (relativity of simultaneity). Every reference-body (co-ordinate system) has its own particular time; unless we are told the reference-body to which the statement of time refers, there is no meaning in a statement of the time of an event.

Now before the advent of the theory of relativity it had always tacitly been assumed in physics that the statement of time had an absolute significance, i.e. that it is independent of the state of motion of the body of reference. But we have just seen that this assumption is incompatible with the most natural definition of simultaneity; if we discard this assumption, then the conflict between the law of the propagation of light in vacuo and the principle of relativity (developed in Section VII) disappears.

We were led to that conflict by the considerations of Section VI, which are now no longer tenable. In that section we concluded that the man in the carriage, who traverses the distance w per second relative to the carriage, traverses the same distance also with respect to the embankment in each second of time. But, according to the foregoing considerations, the time required by a particular occurrence with respect to the carriage must not be considered equal to the duration of the same occurrence as judged from the embankment (as reference-body). Hence it cannot be contended that the man in walking travels the distance w relative to the railway line in a time which is equal to one second as judged from the embankment.

Moreover, the considerations of Section VI are based on yet a second assumption, which, in the light of a strict consideration, appears to be arbitrary, although it was always tacitly made even before the introduction of the theory of relativity.





X.

ON THE RELATIVITY OF THE CONCEPTION OF DISTANCE


Let us consider two particular points on the train [8] travelling along the embankment with the velocity v, and inquire as to their distance apart. We already know that it is necessary to have a body of reference for the measurement of a distance, with respect to which body the distance can be measured up. It is the simplest plan to use the train itself as reference-body (co-ordinate system). An observer in the train measures the interval by marking off his measuring-rod in a straight line (e.g. along the floor of the carriage) as many times as is necessary to take him from the one marked point to the other. Then the number which tells us how often the rod has to be laid down is the required distance.



[8]

e.g. the middle of the first and of the hundredth carriage.

It is a different matter when the distance has to be judged from the railway line. Here the following method suggests itself. If we call A′ and B′ the two points on the train whose distance apart is required, then both of these points are moving with the velocity v along the embankment. In the first place we require to determine the points A and B of the embankment which are just being passed by the two points A′ and B′ at a particular time t—judged from the embankment. These points A and B of the embankment can be determined by applying the definition of time given in Section VIII. The distance between these points A and B is then measured by repeated application of the measuring-rod along the embankment.

A priori it is by no means certain that this last measurement will supply us with the same result as the first. Thus the length of the train as measured from the embankment may be different from that obtained by measuring in the train itself. This circumstance leads us to a second objection which must be raised against the apparently obvious consideration of Section VI. Namely, if the man in the carriage covers the distance w in a unit of time—measured from the train,—then this distance—as measured from the embankment is not necessarily also equal to w.





XI.

THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION


The results of the last three sections show that the apparent incompatibility of the law of propagation of light with the principle of relativity (Section VII) has been derived by means of a consideration which borrowed two unjustifiable hypotheses from classical mechanics; these are as follows:

(1) The time-interval (time) between two events is independent of the condition of motion of the body of reference.

(2) The space-interval (distance) between two points of a rigid body is independent of the condition of motion of the body of reference.

If we drop these hypotheses, then the dilemma of Section VII disappears, because the theorem of the addition of velocities derived in Section VI becomes invalid. The possibility presents itself that the law of the propagation of light in vacuo may be compatible with the principle of relativity, and the question arises: How have we to modify the considerations of Section VI in order to remove the apparent disagreement between these two fundamental results of experience? This question leads to a general one. In the discussion of Section VI we have to do with places and times relative both to the train and to the embankment. How are we to find the place and time of an event in relation to the train, when we know the place and time of the event with respect to the railway embankment? Is there a thinkable answer to this question of such a nature that the law of transmission of light in vacuo does not contradict the principle of relativity? In other words: Can we conceive of a relation between place and time of the individual events relative to both reference-bodies, such that every ray of light possesses the velocity of transmission c relative to the embankment and relative to the train? This question leads to a quite definite positive answer, and to a perfectly definite transformation law for the space-time magnitudes of an event when changing over from one body of reference to another.

Before we deal with this, we shall introduce the following incidental consideration. Up to the present we have only considered events taking place along the embankment, which had mathematically to assume the function of a straight line. In the manner indicated in Section II we can imagine this reference-body supplemented laterally and in a vertical direction by means of a framework of rods, so that an event which takes place anywhere can be localised with reference to this framework. Similarly, we can imagine the train travelling with the velocity v to be continued across the whole of space, so that every event, no matter how far off it may be, could also be localised with respect to the second framework. Without committing any fundamental error, we can disregard the fact that in reality these frameworks would continually interfere with each other, owing to the impenetrability of solid bodies. In every such framework we imagine three surfaces perpendicular to each other marked out, and designated as “co-ordinate planes” (“co-ordinate system”). A co-ordinate system K then corresponds to the embankment, and a co-ordinate system K′ to the train. An event, wherever it may have taken place, would be fixed in space with respect to K by the three perpendiculars x, y, z on the co-ordinate planes, and with regard to time by a time value t. Relative to K′, the same event would be fixed in respect of space and time by corresponding values x′, y′, z′, t′, which of course are not identical with x, y, z, t. It has already been set forth in detail how these magnitudes are to be regarded as results of physical measurements.





Obviously our problem can be exactly formulated in the following manner. What are the values x′, y′, z′, t′, of an event with respect to K′, when the magnitudes x, y, z, t, of the same event with respect to K are given? The relations must be so chosen that the law of the transmission of light in vacuo is satisfied for one and the same ray of light (and of course for every ray) with respect to K and K′. For the relative orientation in space of the co-ordinate systems indicated in the diagram (Fig. 2), this problem is solved by means of the equations:





y′ = y

z′ = z





This system of equations is known as the “Lorentz transformation.”[9]



[9]

A simple derivation of the Lorentz transformation is given in Appendix I.

If in place of the law of transmission of light we had taken as our basis the tacit assumptions of the older mechanics as to the absolute character of times and lengths, then instead of the above we should have obtained the following equations:

x′ = x – vt

y′ = y

z′ = z

t′ = t

This system of equations is often termed the “Galilei transformation.” The Galilei transformation can be obtained from the Lorentz transformation by substituting an infinitely large value for the velocity of light c in the latter transformation.

Aided by the following illustration, we can readily see that, in accordance with the Lorentz transformation, the law of the transmission of light in vacuo is satisfied both for the reference-body K and for the reference-body K′. A light-signal is sent along the positive x-axis, and this light-stimulus advances in accordance with the equation

x = ct,

i.e. with the velocity c. According to the equations of the Lorentz transformation, this simple relation between x and t involves a relation between x′ and t′. In point of fact, if we substitute for x the value ct in the first and fourth equations of the Lorentz transformation, we obtain:





from which, by division, the expression

x′ = ct′

immediately follows. If referred to the system K′, the propagation of light takes place according to this equation. We thus see that the velocity of transmission relative to the reference-body K′ is also equal to c. The same result is obtained for rays of light advancing in any other direction whatsoever. Of cause this is not surprising, since the equations of the Lorentz transformation were derived conformably to this point of view.





XII.

THE BEHAVIOUR OF MEASURING-RODS AND CLOCKS IN MOTION


Place a metre-rod in the x′-axis of K′ in such a manner that one end (the beginning) coincides with the point x′ = 0 whilst the other end (the end of the rod) coincides with the point x′ = 1. What is the length of the metre-rod relatively to the system K? In order to learn this, we need only ask where the beginning of the rod and the end of the rod lie with respect to K at a particular time t of the system K. By means of the first equation of the Lorentz transformation the values of these two points at the time t = 0 can be shown to be





the distance between the points being





But the metre-rod is moving with the velocity v relative to K. It therefore follows that the length of a rigid metre-rod moving in the direction of its length with a velocity v is





of a metre. The rigid rod is thus shorter when in motion than when at rest, and the more quickly it is moving, the shorter is the rod. For the velocity v = c we should have





and for still greater velocities the square-root becomes imaginary. From this we conclude that in the theory of relativity the velocity c plays the part of a limiting velocity, which can neither be reached nor exceeded by any real body.

Of course this feature of the velocity c as a limiting velocity also clearly follows from the equations of the Lorentz transformation, for these became meaningless if we choose values of v greater than c.

If, on the contrary, we had considered a metre-rod at rest in the x-axis with respect to K, then we should have found that the length of the rod as judged from K′ would have been





this is quite in accordance with the principle of relativity which forms the basis of our considerations.

A priori it is quite clear that we must be able to learn something about the physical behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks from the equations of transformation, for the magnitudes z, y, x, t, are nothing more nor less than the results of measurements obtainable by means of measuring-rods and clocks. If we had based our considerations on the Galileian transformation we should not have obtained a contraction of the rod as a consequence of its motion.

Let us now consider a seconds-clock which is permanently situated at the origin (x′ = 0) of K′. t′ = 0 and t′ = 1 are two successive ticks of this clock. The first and fourth equations of the Lorentz transformation give for these two ticks:

t = 0

and





As judged from K, the clock is moving with the velocity v; as judged from this reference-body, the time which elapses between two strokes of the clock is not one second, but





seconds, i.e. a somewhat larger time. As a consequence of its motion the clock goes more slowly than when at rest. Here also the velocity c plays the part of an unattainable limiting velocity.





XIII.

THEOREM OF THE ADDITION OF VELOCITIES. THE EXPERIMENT OF FIZEAU


Now in practice we can move clocks and measuring-rods only with velocities that are small compared with the velocity of light; hence we shall hardly be able to compare the results of the previous section directly with the reality. But, on the other hand, these results must strike you as being very singular, and for that reason I shall now draw another conclusion from the theory, one which can easily be derived from the foregoing considerations, and which has been most elegantly confirmed by experiment.

In Section VI we derived the theorem of the addition of velocities in one direction in the form which also results from the hypotheses of classical mechanics. This theorem can also be deduced readily from the Galilei transformation (Section XI). In place of the man walking inside the carriage, we introduce a point moving relatively to the co-ordinate system K′ in accordance with the equation

x′ = wt′

By means of the first and fourth equations of the Galilei transformation we can express x′ and t′ in terms of x and t, and we then obtain

x = (v + w)t

This equation expresses nothing else than the law of motion of the point with reference to the system K (of the man with reference to the embankment). We denote this velocity by the symbol W, and we then obtain, as in Section VI,

W = v + w . . . . . . . (A).

But we can carry out this consideration just as well on the basis of the theory of relativity. In the equation

x′ = wt′

we must then express x′ and t′ in terms of x and t, making use of the first and fourth equations of the Lorentz transformation. Instead of the equation (A) we then obtain the equation





which corresponds to the theorem of addition for velocities in one direction according to the theory of relativity. The question now arises as to which of these two theorems is the better in accord with experience. On this point we are enlightened by a most important experiment which the brilliant physicist Fizeau performed more than half a century ago, and which has been repeated since then by some of the best experimental physicists, so that there can be no doubt about its result. The experiment is concerned with the following question. Light travels in a motionless liquid with a particular velocity w. How quickly does it travel in the direction of the arrow in the tube T (see the accompanying diagram, Fig. 3) when the liquid above mentioned is flowing through the tube with a velocity v?





In accordance with the principle of relativity we shall certainly have to take for granted that the propagation of light always takes place with the same velocity w with respect to the liquid, whether the latter is in motion with reference to other bodies or not. The velocity of light relative to the liquid and the velocity of the latter relative to the tube are thus known, and we require the velocity of light relative to the tube.

It is clear that we have the problem of Section VI again before us. The tube plays the part of the railway embankment or of the co-ordinate system K, the liquid plays the part of the carriage or of the co-ordinate system K′, and finally, the light plays the part of the man walking along the carriage, or of the moving point in the present section. If we denote the velocity of the light relative to the tube by W, then this is given by the equation (A) or (B), according as the Galilei transformation or the Lorentz transformation corresponds to the facts. Experiment[10] decides in favour of equation (B) derived from the theory of relativity, and the agreement is, indeed, very exact. According to recent and most excellent measurements by Zeeman, the influence of the velocity of flow v on the propagation of light is represented by formula (B) to within one per cent.



[10]

Fizeau found





where





is the index of refraction of the liquid. On the other hand, owing to the smallness of





as compared with 1, we can replace (B) in the first place by





or to the same order of approximation by





which agrees with Fizeau’s result.

Nevertheless we must now draw attention to the fact that a theory of this phenomenon was given by H. A. Lorentz long before the statement of the theory of relativity. This theory was of a purely electrodynamical nature, and was obtained by the use of particular hypotheses as to the electromagnetic structure of matter. This circumstance, however, does not in the least diminish the conclusiveness of the experiment as a crucial test in favour of the theory of relativity, for the electrodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz, on which the original theory was based, in no way opposes the theory of relativity. Rather has the latter been developed trom electrodynamics as an astoundingly simple combination and generalisation of the hypotheses, formerly independent of each other, on which electrodynamics was built.





XIV.

THE HEURISTIC VALUE OF THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY


Our train of thought in the foregoing pages can be epitomised in the following manner. Experience has led to the conviction that, on the one hand, the principle of relativity holds true and that on the other hand the velocity of transmission of light in vacuo has to be considered equal to a constant c. By uniting these two postulates we obtained the law of transformation for the rectangular co-ordinates x, y, z and the time t of the events which constitute the processes of nature. In this connection we did not obtain the Galilei transformation, but, differing from classical mechanics, the Lorentz transformation.

The law of transmission of light, the acceptance of which is justified by our actual knowledge, played an important part in this process of thought. Once in possession of the Lorentz transformation, however, we can combine this with the principle of relativity, and sum up the theory thus:

Every general law of nature must be so constituted that it is transformed into a law of exactly the same form when, instead of the space-time variables x, y, z, t of the original coordinate system K, we introduce new space-time variables x′, y′, z′, t′ of a co-ordinate system K′. In this connection the relation between the ordinary and the accented magnitudes is given by the Lorentz transformation. Or in brief: General laws of nature are co-variant with respect to Lorentz transformations.

This is a definite mathematical condition that the theory of relativity demands of a natural law, and in virtue of this, the theory becomes a valuable heuristic aid in the search for general laws of nature. If a general law of nature were to be found which did not satisfy this condition, then at least one of the two fundamental assumptions of the theory would have been disproved. Let us now examine what general results the latter theory has hitherto evinced.





XV.

GENERAL RESULTS OF THE THEORY


It is clear from our previous considerations that the (special) theory of relativity has grown out of electrodynamics and optics. In these fields it has not appreciably altered the predictions of theory, but it has considerably simplified the theoretical structure, i.e. the derivation of laws, and—what is incomparably more important—it has considerably reduced the number of independent hypotheses forming the basis of theory. The special theory of relativity has rendered the Maxwell-Lorentz theory so plausible, that the latter would have been generally accepted by physicists even if experiment had decided less unequivocally in its favour.

Classical mechanics required to be modified before it could come into line with the demands of the special theory of relativity. For the main part, however, this modification affects only the laws for rapid motions, in which the velocities of matter v are not very small as compared with the velocity of light. We have experience of such rapid motions only in the case of electrons and ions; for other motions the variations from the laws of classical mechanics are too small to make themselves evident in practice. We shall not consider the motion of stars until we come to speak of the general theory of relativity. In accordance with the theory of relativity the kinetic energy of a material point of mass m is no longer given by the well-known expression





but by the expression





This expression approaches infinity as the velocity v approaches the velocity of light c. The velocity must therefore always remain less than c, however great may be the energies used to produce the acceleration. If we develop the expression for the kinetic energy in the form of a series, we obtain





When





is small compared with unity, the third of these terms is always small in comparison with the second, which last is alone considered in classical mechanics. The first term mc2 does not contain the velocity, and requires no consideration if we are only dealing with the question as to how the energy of a point-mass; depends on the velocity. We shall speak of its essential significance later.

The most important result of a general character to which the special theory of relativity has led is concerned with the conception of mass. Before the advent of relativity, physics recognised two conservation laws of fundamental importance, namely, the law of the conservation of energy and the law of the conservation of mass these two fundamental laws appeared to be quite independent of each other. By means of the theory of relativity they have been united into one law. We shall now briefly consider how this unification came about, and what meaning is to be attached to it.

The principle of relativity requires that the law of the conservation of energy should hold not only with reference to a co-ordinate system K, but also with respect to every co-ordinate system K′ which is in a state of uniform motion of translation relative to K, or, briefly, relative to every “Galileian” system of co-ordinates. In contrast to classical mechanics; the Lorentz transformation is the deciding factor in the transition from one such system to another.

By means of comparatively simple considerations we are led to draw the following conclusion from these premises, in conjunction with the fundamental equations of the electrodynamics of Maxwell: A body moving with the velocity v, which absorbs[11] an amount of energy E0 in the form of radiation without suffering an alteration in velocity in the process, has, as a consequence, its energy increased by an amount





[11]

E0 is the energy taken up, as judged from a co-ordinate system moving with the body.

In consideration of the expression given above for the kinetic energy of the body, the required energy of the body comes out to be





Thus the body has the same energy as a body of mass





moving with the velocity v. Hence we can say: If a body takes up an amount of energy E0, then its inertial mass increases by an amount





the inertial mass of a body is not a constant but varies according to the change in the energy of the body. The inertial mass of a system of bodies can even be regarded as a measure of its energy. The law of the conservation of the mass of a system becomes identical with the law of the conservation of energy, and is only valid provided that the system neither takes up nor sends out energy. Writing the expression for the energy in the form





we see that the term mc2, which has hitherto attracted our attention, is nothing else than the energy possessed by the body[12] before it absorbed the energy E0.



[12]

As judged from a co-ordinate system moving with the body.

A direct comparison of this relation with experiment is not possible at the present time (1920; see[Note], p. 48), owing to the fact that the changes in energy E0 to which we can subject a system are not large enough to make themselves perceptible as a change in the inertial mass of the system.





is too small in comparison with the mass m, which was present before the alteration of the energy. It is owing to this circumstance that classical mechanics was able to establish successfully the conservation of mass as a law of independent validity.



[Note]

The equation E = mc2 has been thoroughly proved time and again since this time.

Let me add a final remark of a fundamental nature. The success of the Faraday-Maxwell interpretation of electromagnetic action at a distance resulted in physicists becoming convinced that there are no such things as instantaneous actions at a distance (not involving an intermediary medium) of the type of Newton’s law of gravitation.

According to the theory of relativity, action at a distance with the velocity of light always takes the place of instantaneous action at a distance or of action at a distance with an infinite velocity of transmission. This is connected with the fact that the velocity c plays a fundamental role in this theory. In Part II we shall see in what way this result becomes modified in the general theory of relativity.





XVI.

EXPERIENCE AND THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY


To what extent is the special theory of relativity supported by experience? This question is not easily answered for the reason already mentioned in connection with the fundamental experiment of Fizeau. The special theory of relativity has crystallised out from the Maxwell-Lorentz theory of electromagnetic phenomena. Thus all facts of experience which support the electromagnetic theory also support the theory of relativity. As being of particular importance, I mention here the fact that the theory of relativity enables us to predict the effects produced on the light reaching us from the fixed stars. These results are obtained in an exceedingly simple manner, and the effects indicated, which are due to the relative motion of the earth with reference to those fixed stars are found to be in accord with experience. We refer to the yearly movement of the apparent position of the fixed stars resulting from the motion of the earth round the sun (aberration), and to the influence of the radial components of the relative motions of the fixed stars with respect to the earth on the colour of the light reaching us from them. The latter effect manifests itself in a slight displacement of the spectral lines of the light transmitted to us from a fixed star, as compared with the position of the same spectral lines when they are produced by a terrestrial source of light (Doppler principle). The experimental arguments in favour of the Maxwell-Lorentz theory, which are at the same time arguments in favour of the theory of relativity, are too numerous to be set forth here. In reality they limit the theoretical possibilities to such an extent, that no other theory than that of Maxwell and Lorentz has been able to hold its own when tested by experience.

But there are two classes of experimental facts hitherto obtained which can be represented in the Maxwell-Lorentz theory only by the introduction of an auxiliary hypothesis, which in itself—i.e. without making use of the theory of relativity—appears extraneous.

It is known that cathode rays and the so-called β-rays emitted by radioactive substances consist of negatively electrified particles (electrons) of very small inertia and large velocity. By examining the deflection of these rays under the influence of electric and magnetic fields, we can study the law of motion of these particles very exactly.

In the theoretical treatment of these electrons, we are faced with the difficulty that electrodynamic theory of itself is unable to give an account of their nature. For since electrical masses of one sign repel each other, the negative electrical masses constituting the electron would necessarily be scattered under the influence of their mutual repulsions, unless there are forces of another kind operating between them, the nature of which has hitherto remained obscure to us.[13] If we now assume that the relative distances between the electrical masses constituting the electron remain unchanged during the motion of the electron (rigid connection in the sense of classical mechanics), we arrive at a law of motion of the electron which does not agree with experience. Guided by purely formal points of view, H. A. Lorentz was the first to introduce the hypothesis that the form of the electron experiences a contraction in the direction of motion in consequence of that motion. the contracted length being proportional to the expression





This, hypothesis, which is not justifiable by any electrodynamical facts, supplies us then with that particular law of motion which has been confirmed with great precision in recent years.



[13]

The general theory of relativity renders it likely that the electrical masses of an electron are held together by gravitational forces.

The theory of relativity leads to the same law of motion, without requiring any special hypothesis whatsoever as to the structure and the behaviour of the electron. We arrived at a similar conclusion in Section XIII in connection with the experiment of Fizeau, the result of which is foretold by the theory of relativity without the necessity of drawing on hypotheses as to the physical nature of the liquid.

The second class of facts to which we have alluded has reference to the question whether or not the motion of the earth in space can be made perceptible in terrestrial experiments. We have already remarked in Section V that all attempts of this nature led to a negative result. Before the theory of relativity was put forward, it was difficult to become reconciled to this negative result, for reasons now to be discussed. The inherited prejudices about time and space did not allow any doubt to arise as to the prime importance of the Galileian transformation for changing over from one body of reference to another. Now assuming that the Maxwell-Lorentz equations hold for a reference-body K, we then find that they do not hold for a reference-body K′ moving uniformly with respect to K, if we assume that the relations of the Galileian transformation exist between the co-ordinates of K and K′. It thus appears that, of all Galileian co-ordinate systems, one (K) corresponding to a particular state of motion is physically unique. This result was interpreted physically by regarding K as at rest with respect to a hypothetical æther of space. On the other hand, all coordinate systems K′ moving relatively to K were to be regarded as in motion with respect to the æther. To this motion of K′ against the æther (“æther-drift” relative to K′) were attributed the more complicated laws which were supposed to hold relative to K′. Strictly speaking, such an æther-drift ought also to be assumed relative to the earth, and for a long time the efforts of physicists were devoted to attempts to detect the existence of an æther-drift at the earth’s surface.

In one of the most notable of these attempts Michelson devised a method which appears as though it must be decisive. Imagine two mirrors so arranged on a rigid body that the reflecting surfaces face each other. A ray of light requires a perfectly definite time T to pass from one mirror to the other and back again, if the whole system be at rest with respect to the æther. It is found by calculation, however, that a slightly different time T′ is required for this process, if the body, together with the mirrors, be moving relatively to the æther. And yet another point: it is shown by calculation that for a given velocity v with reference to the æther, this time T′ is different when the body is moving perpendicularly to the planes of the mirrors from that resulting when the motion is parallel to these planes. Although the estimated difference between these two times is exceedingly small, Michelson and Morley performed an experiment involving interference in which this difference should have been clearly detectable. But the experiment gave a negative result—a fact very perplexing to physicists. Lorentz and FitzGerald rescued the theory from this difficulty by assuming that the motion of the body relative to the æther produces a contraction of the body in the direction of motion, the amount of contraction being just sufficient to compensate for the difference in time mentioned above. Comparison with the discussion in Section XII shows that also from the standpoint of the theory of relativity this solution of the difficulty was the right one. But on the basis of the theory of relativity the method of interpretation is incomparably more satisfactory. According to this theory there is no such thing as a “specially favoured” (unique) co-ordinate system to occasion the introduction of the æther-idea, and hence there can be no æther-drift, nor any experiment with which to demonstrate it. Here the contraction of moving bodies follows from the two fundamental principles of the theory, without the introduction of particular hypotheses; and as the prime factor involved in this contraction we find, not the motion in itself, to which we cannot attach any meaning, but the motion with respect to the body of reference chosen in the particular case in point. Thus for a co-ordinate system moving with the earth the mirror system of Michelson and Morley is not shortened, but it is shortened for a co-ordinate system which is at rest relatively to the sun.





XVII.

MINKOWSKI’S FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE


The non-mathematician is seized by a mysterious shuddering when he hears of “four-dimensional” things, by a feeling not unlike that awakened by thoughts of the occult. And yet there is no more common-place statement than that the world in which we live is a four-dimensional space-time continuum.

Space is a three-dimensional continuum. By this we mean that it is possible to describe the position of a point (at rest) by means of three numbers (co-ordinates) x, y, z, and that there is an indefinite number of points in the neighbourhood of this one, the position of which can be described by co-ordinates such as x1, y1, z1, which may be as near as we choose to the respective values of the co-ordinates x, y, z, of the first point. In virtue of the latter property we speak of a “continuum,” and owing to the fact that there are three co-ordinates we speak of it as being “three-dimensional.”

Similarly, the world of physical phenomena which was briefly called “world” by Minkowski is naturally four dimensional in the space-time sense. For it is composed of individual events, each of which is described by four numbers, namely, three space co-ordinates x, y, z, and a time co-ordinate, the time value t. The “world” is in this sense also a continuum; for to every event there are as many “neighbouring” events (realised or at least thinkable) as we care to choose, the co-ordinates x1, y1, z1, t1 of which differ by an indefinitely small amount from those of the event x, y, z, t originally considered. That we have not been accustomed to regard the world in this sense as a four-dimensional continuum is due to the fact that in physics, before the advent of the theory of relativity, time played a different and more independent rôle, as compared with the space coordinates. It is for this reason that we have been in the habit of treating time as an independent continuum. As a matter of fact, according to classical mechanics, time is absolute, i.e. it is independent of the position and the condition of motion of the system of co-ordinates. We see this expressed in the last equation of the Galileian transformation (t′ = t).

The four-dimensional mode of consideration of the “world” is natural on the theory of relativity, since according to this theory time is robbed of its independence. This is shown by the fourth equation of the Lorentz transformation:





Moreover, according to this equation the time difference Δt′ of two events with respect to K′ does not in general vanish, even when the time difference Δt of the same events with reference to K vanishes. Pure “space-distance” of two events with respect to K results in “time-distance ” of the same events with respect to K. But the discovery of Minkowski, which was of importance for the formal development of the theory of relativity, does not lie here. It is to be found rather in the fact of his recognition that the four-dimensional space-time continuum of the theory of relativity, in its most essential formal properties, shows a pronounced relationship to the three-dimensional continuum of Euclidean geometrical space.[14] In order to give due prominence to this relationship, however, we must replace the usual time co-ordinate t by an imaginary magnitude





proportional to it. Under these conditions, the natural laws satisfying the demands of the (special) theory of relativity assume mathematical forms, in which the time co-ordinate plays exactly the same role as the three space co-ordinates. Formally, these four co-ordinates correspond exactly to the three space co-ordinates in Euclidean geometry. It must be clear even to the non-mathematician that, as a consequence of this purely formal addition to our knowledge, the theory perforce gained clearness in no mean measure.



[14]

Cf. the somewhat more detailed discussion in Appendix II.

These inadequate remarks can give the reader only a vague notion of the important idea contributed by Minkowski. Without it the general theory of relativity, of which the fundamental ideas are developed in the following pages, would perhaps have got no farther than its long clothes. Minkowski’s work is doubtless difficult of access to anyone inexperienced in mathematics, but since it is not necessary to have a very exact grasp of this work in order to understand the fundamental ideas of either the special or the general theory of relativity, I shall leave it here at present, and revert to it only towards the end of Part II.





PART II: THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY





XVIII.

SPECIAL AND GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY


The basal principle, which was the pivot of all our previous considerations, was the special principle of relativity, i.e. the principle of the physical relativity of all uniform motion. Let as once more analyse its meaning carefully.

It was at all times clear that, from the point of view of the idea it conveys to us, every motion must be considered only as a relative motion. Returning to the illustration we have frequently used of the embankment and the railway carriage, we can express the fact of the motion here taking place in the following two forms, both of which are equally justifiable:

(a) The carriage is in motion relative to the embankment,

(b) The embankment is in motion relative to the carriage.

In (a) the embankment, in (b) the carriage, serves as the body of reference in our statement of the motion taking place. If it is simply a question of detecting or of describing the motion involved, it is in principle immaterial to what reference-body we refer the motion. As already mentioned, this is self-evident, but it must not be confused with the much more comprehensive statement called “the principle of relativity,” which we have taken as the basis of our investigations.

The principle we have made use of not only maintains that we may equally well choose the carriage or the embankment as our reference-body for the description of any event (for this, too, is self-evident). Our principle rather asserts what follows: If we formulate the general laws of nature as they are obtained from experience, by making use of

(a) the embankment as reference-body,

(b) the railway carriage as reference-body,

then these general laws of nature (e.g. the laws of mechanics or the law of the propagation of light in vacuo) have exactly the same form in both cases. This can also be expressed as follows: For the physical description of natural processes, neither of the reference bodies K, K′ is unique (lit. “specially marked out”) as compared with the other. Unlike the first, this latter statement need not of necessity hold a priori; it is not contained in the conceptions of “motion” and “reference-body” and derivable from them; only experience can decide as to its correctness or incorrectness.

Up to the present, however, we have by no means maintained the equivalence of all bodies of reference K in connection with the formulation of natural laws. Our course was more on the following Iines. In the first place, we started out from the assumption that there exists a reference-body K, whose condition of motion is such that the Galileian law holds with respect to it: A particle left to itself and sufficiently far removed from all other particles moves uniformly in a straight line. With reference to K (Galileian reference-body) the laws of nature were to be as simple as possible. But in addition to K, all bodies of reference K′ should be given preference in this sense, and they should be exactly equivalent to K for the formulation of natural laws, provided that they are in a state of uniform rectilinear and non-rotary motion with respect to K; all these bodies of reference are to be regarded as Galileian reference-bodies. The validity of the principle of relativity was assumed only for these reference-bodies, but not for others (e.g. those possessing motion of a different kind). In this sense we speak of the special principle of relativity, or special theory of relativity.

In contrast to this we wish to understand by the “general principle of relativity” the following statement: All bodies of reference K, K′, etc., are equivalent for the description of natural phenomena (formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever may be their state of motion. But before proceeding farther, it ought to be pointed out that this formulation must be replaced later by a more abstract one, for reasons which will become evident at a later stage.

Since the introduction of the special principle of relativity has been justified, every intellect which strives after generalisation must feel the temptation to venture the step towards the general principle of relativity. But a simple and apparently quite reliable consideration seems to suggest that, for the present at any rate, there is little hope of success in such an attempt; Let us imagine ourselves transferred to our old friend the railway carriage, which is travelling at a uniform rate. As long as it is moving uniformly, the occupant of the carriage is not sensible of its motion, and it is for this reason that he can without reluctance interpret the facts of the case as indicating that the carriage is at rest, but the embankment in motion. Moreover, according to the special principle of relativity, this interpretation is quite justified also from a physical point of view. If the motion of the carriage is now changed into a non-uniform motion, as for instance by a powerful application of the brakes, then the occupant of the carriage experiences a correspondingly powerful jerk forwards. The retarded motion is manifested in the mechanical behaviour of bodies relative to the person in the railway carriage. The mechanical behaviour is different from that of the case previously considered, and for this reason it would appear to be impossible that the same mechanical laws hold relatively to the non-uniformly moving carriage, as hold with reference to the carriage when at rest or in uniform motion. At all events it is clear that the Galileian law does not hold with respect to the non-uniformly moving carriage. Because of this, we feel compelled at the present juncture to grant a kind of absolute physical reality to non-uniform motion, in opposition to the general principle of relativity. But in what follows we shall soon see that this conclusion cannot be maintained.





XIX.

THE GRAVITATIONAL FIELD


“If we pick up a stone and then let it go, why does it fall to the ground?” The usual answer to this question is: “Because it is attracted by the earth.” Modern physics formulates the answer rather differently for the following reason. As a result of the more careful study of electromagnetic phenomena, we have come to regard action at a distance as a process impossible without the intervention of some intermediary medium. If, for instance, a magnet attracts a piece of iron, we cannot be content to regard this as meaning that the magnet acts directly on the iron through the intermediate empty space, but we are constrained to imagine—after the manner of Faraday—that the magnet always calls into being something physically real in the space around it, that something being what we call a “magnetic field.” In its turn this magnetic field operates on the piece of iron, so that the latter strives to move towards the magnet. We shall not discuss here the justification for this incidental conception, which is indeed a somewhat arbitrary one. We shall only mention that with its aid electromagnetic phenomena can be theoretically represented much more satisfactorily than without it, and this applies particularly to the transmission of electromagnetic waves. The effects of gravitation also are regarded in an analogous manner.

The action of the earth on the stone takes place indirectly. The earth produces in its surrounding a gravitational field, which acts on the stone and produces its motion of fall. As we know from experience, the intensity of the action on a body dimishes according to a quite definite law, as we proceed farther and farther away from the earth. From our point of view this means: The law governing the properties of the gravitational field in space must be a perfectly definite one, in order correctly to represent the diminution of gravitational action with the distance from operative bodies. It is something like this: The body (e.g. the earth) produces a field in its immediate neighbourhood directly; the intensity and direction of the field at points farther removed from the body are thence determined by the law which governs the properties in space of the gravitational fields themselves.

In contrast to electric and magnetic fields, the gravitational field exhibits a most remarkable property, which is of fundamental importance for what follows. Bodies which are moving under the sole influence of a gravitational field receive an acceleration, which does not in the least depend either on the material or on the physical state of the body. For instance, a piece of lead and a piece of wood fall in exactly the same manner in a gravitational field (in vacuo), when they start off from rest or with the same initial velocity. This law, which holds most accurately, can be expressed in a different form in the light of the following consideration.

According to Newton’s law of motion, we have

(Force) = (inertial mass) x (acceleration),

where the “inertial mass” is a characteristic constant of the accelerated body. If now gravitation is the cause of the acceleration, we then have

(Force) = (gravitational mass) x (intensity of the gravitational field),

where the “gravitational mass” is likewise a characteristic constant for the body. From these two relations follows:





If now, as we find from experience, the acceleration is to be independent of the nature and the condition of the body and always the same for a given gravitational field, then the ratio of the gravitational to the inertial mass must likewise be the same for all bodies. By a suitable choice of units we can thus make this ratio equal to unity. We then have the following law: The gravitational mass of a body is equal to its inertial mass.

It is true that this important law had hitherto been recorded in mechanics, but it had not been interpreted. A satisfactory interpretation can be obtained only if we recognise the following fact: The same quality of a body manifests itself according to circumstances as “inertia” or as “weight” (lit. “heaviness”). In the following section we shall show to what extent this is actually the case, and how this question is connected with the general postulate of relativity.





XX.

THE EQUALITY OF INERTIAL AND GRAVITATIONAL MASS AS AN ARGUMENT FOR THE GENERAL POSTULATE OF RELATIVITY


We imagine a large portion of empty space, so far removed from stars and other appreciable masses, that we have before us approximately the conditions required by the fundamental law of Galilei. It is then possible to choose a Galileian reference-body for this part of space (world), relative to which points at rest remain at rest and points in motion continue permanently in uniform rectilinear motion. As reference-body let us imagine a spacious chest resembling a room with an observer inside who is equipped with apparatus. Gravitation naturally does not exist for this observer. He must fasten himself with strings to the floor, otherwise the slightest impact against the floor will cause him to rise slowly towards the ceiling of the room.

To the middle of the lid of the chest is fixed externally a hook with rope attached, and now a “being” (what kind of a being is immaterial to us) begins pulling at this with a constant force. The chest together with the observer then begin to move “upwards” with a uniformly accelerated motion. In course of time their velocity will reach unheard-of values—provided that we are viewing all this from another reference-body which is not being pulled with a rope.

But how does the man in the chest regard the Process? The acceleration of the chest will be transmitted to him by the reaction of the floor of the chest. He must therefore take up this pressure by means of his legs if he does not wish to be laid out full length on the floor. He is then standing in the chest in exactly the same way as anyone stands in a room of a home on our earth. If he releases a body which he previously had in his land, the accelertion of the chest will no longer be transmitted to this body, and for this reason the body will approach the floor of the chest with an accelerated relative motion. The observer will further convince himself that the acceleration of the body towards the floor of the chest is always of the same magnitude, whatever kind of body he may happen to use for the experiment.

Relying on his knowledge of the gravitational field (as it was discussed in the preceding section), the man in the chest will thus come to the conclusion that he and the chest are in a gravitational field which is constant with regard to time. Of course he will be puzzled for a moment as to why the chest does not fall in this gravitational field. just then, however, he discovers the hook in the middle of the lid of the chest and the rope which is attached to it, and he consequently comes to the conclusion that the chest is suspended at rest in the gravitational field.

Ought we to smile at the man and say that he errs in his conclusion? I do not believe we ought to if we wish to remain consistent; we must rather admit that his mode of grasping the situation violates neither reason nor known mechanical laws. Even though it is being accelerated with respect to the “Galileian space” first considered, we can nevertheless regard the chest as being at rest. We have thus good grounds for extending the principle of relativity to include bodies of reference which are accelerated with respect to each other, and as a result we have gained a powerful argument for a generalised postulate of relativity.

We must note carefully that the possibility of this mode of interpretation rests on the fundamental property of the gravitational field of giving all bodies the same acceleration, or, what comes to the same thing, on the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass. If this natural law did not exist, the man in the accelerated chest would not be able to interpret the behaviour of the bodies around him on the supposition of a gravitational field, and he would not be justified on the grounds of experience in supposing his reference-body to be “at rest.”

Suppose that the man in the chest fixes a rope to the inner side of the lid, and that he attaches a body to the free end of the rope. The result of this will be to stretch the rope so that it will hang “vertically” downwards. If we ask for an opinion of the cause of tension in the rope, the man in the chest will say: “The suspended body experiences a downward force in the gravitational field, and this is neutralised by the tension of the rope; what determines the magnitude of the tension of the rope is the gravitational mass of the suspended body.” On the other hand, an observer who is poised freely in space will interpret the condition of things thus: “The rope must perforce take part in the accelerated motion of the chest, and it transmits this motion to the body attached to it. The tension of the rope is just large enough to effect the acceleration of the body. That which determines the magnitude of the tension of the rope is the inertial mass of the body.” Guided by this example, we see that our extension of the principle of relativity implies the necessity of the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass. Thus we have obtained a physical interpretation of this law.

From our consideration of the accelerated chest we see that a general theory of relativity must yield important results on the laws of gravitation. In point of fact, the systematic pursuit of the general idea of relativity has supplied the laws satisfied by the gravitational field. Before proceeding farther, however, I must warn the reader against a misconception suggested by these considerations. A gravitational field exists for the man in the chest, despite the fact that there was no such field for the co-ordinate system first chosen. Now we might easily suppose that the existence of a gravitational field is always only an apparent one. We might also think that, regardless of the kind of gravitational field which may be present, we could always choose another reference-body such that no gravitational field exists with reference to it. This is by no means true for all gravitational fields, but only for those of quite special form. It is, for instance, impossible to choose a body of reference such that, as judged from it, the gravitational field of the earth (in its entirety) vanishes.

We can now appreciate why that argument is not convincing, which we brought forward against the general principle of relativity at the end of Section XVIII. It is certainly true that the observer in the railway carriage experiences a jerk forwards as a result of the application of the brake, and that he recognises, in this the non-uniformity of motion (retardation) of the carriage. But he is compelled by nobody to refer this jerk to a “real” acceleration (retardation) of the carriage. He might also interpret his experience thus: “My body of reference (the carriage) remains permanently at rest. With reference to it, however, there exists (during the period of application of the brakes) a gravitational field which is directed forwards and which is variable with respect to time. Under the influence of this field, the embankment together with the earth moves non-uniformly in such a manner that their original velocity in the backwards direction is continuously reduced.”





XXI.

IN WHAT RESPECTS ARE THE FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSICAL MECHANICS AND OF THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY UNSATISFACTORY?


We have already stated several times that classical mechanics starts out from the following law: Material particles sufficiently far removed from other material particles continue to move uniformly in a straight line or continue in a state of rest. We have also repeatedly emphasised that this fundamental law can only be valid for bodies of reference K which possess certain unique states of motion, and which are in uniform translational motion relative to each other. Relative to other reference-bodies K the law is not valid. Both in classical mechanics and in the special theory of relativity we therefore differentiate between reference-bodies K relative to which the recognised “laws of nature” can be said to hold, and reference-bodies K relative to which these laws do not hold.

But no person whose mode of thought is logical can rest satisfied with this condition of things. He asks: “How does it come that certain reference-bodies (or their states of motion) are given priority over other reference-bodies (or their states of motion)? What is the reason for this preference?” In order to show clearly what I mean by this question, I shall make use of a comparison.

I am standing in front of a gas range. Standing alongside of each other on the range are two pans so much alike that one may be mistaken for the other. Both are half full of water. I notice that steam is being emitted continuously from the one pan, but not from the other. I am surprised at this, even if I have never seen either a gas range or a pan before. But if I now notice a luminous something of bluish colour under the first pan but not under the other, I cease to be astonished, even if I have never before seen a gas flame. For I can only say that this bluish something will cause the emission of the steam, or at least possibly it may do so. If, however, I notice the bluish something in neither case, and if I observe that the one continuously emits steam whilst the other does not, then I shall remain astonished and dissatisfied until I have discovered some circumstance to which I can attribute the different behaviour of the two pans.

Analogously, I seek in vain for a real something in classical mechanics (or in the special theory of relativity) to which I can attribute the different behaviour of bodies considered with respect to the reference systems K and K′.[15] Newton saw this objection and attempted to invalidate it, but without success. But E. Mach recognised it most clearly of all, and because of this objection he claimed that mechanics must be placed on a new basis. It can only be got rid of by means of a physics which is conformable to the general principle of relativity, since the equations of such a theory hold for every body of reference, whatever may be its state of motion.



[15]

The objection is of importance more especially when the state of motion of the reference-body is of such a nature that it does not require any external agency for its maintenance, e.g. in the case when the reference-body is rotating uniformly.





XXII.

A FEW INFERENCES FROM THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY


The considerations of Section XX show that the general principle of relativity puts us in a position to derive properties of the gravitational field in a purely theoretical manner. Let us suppose, for instance, that we know the space-time “course” for any natural process whatsoever, as regards the manner in which it takes place in the Galileian domain relative to a Galileian body of reference K. By means of purely theoretical operations (i.e. simply by calculation) we are then able to find how this known natural process appears, as seen from a reference-body K′ which is accelerated relatively to K. But since a gravitational field exists with respect to this new body of reference K′, our consideration also teaches us how the gravitational field influences the process studied.

For example, we learn that a body which is in a state of uniform rectilinear motion with respect to K (in accordance with the law of Galilei) is executing an accelerated and in general curvilinear motion with respect to the accelerated reference-body K′ (chest). This acceleration or curvature corresponds to the influence on the moving body of the gravitational field prevailing relatively to K. It is known that a gravitational field influences the movement of bodies in this way, so that our consideration supplies us with nothing essentially new.

However, we obtain a new result of fundamental importance when we carry out the analogous consideration for a ray of light. With respect to the Galileian reference-body K, such a ray of light is transmitted rectilinearly with the velocity c. It can easily be shown that the path of the same ray of light is no longer a straight line when we consider it with reference to the accelerated chest (reference-body K′). From this we conclude, that, in general, rays of light are propagated curvilinearly in gravitational fields. In two respects this result is of great importance.

In the first place, it can be compared with the reality. Although a detailed examination of the question shows that the curvature of light rays required by the general theory of relativity is only exceedingly small for the gravitational fields at our disposal in practice, its estimated magnitude for light rays passing the sun at grazing incidence is nevertheless 1.7 seconds of arc. This ought to manifest itself in the following way. As seen from the earth, certain fixed stars appear to be in the neighbourhood of the sun, and are thus capable of observation during a total eclipse of the sun. At such times, these stars ought to appear to be displaced outwards from the sun by an amount indicated above, as compared with their apparent position in the sky when the sun is situated at another part of the heavens. The examination of the correctness or otherwise of this deduction is a problem of the greatest importance, the early solution of which is to be expected of astronomers.[16]



[16]

By means of the star photographs of two expeditions equipped by a Joint Committee of the Royal and Royal Astronomical Societies, the existence of the deflection of light demanded by theory was first confirmed during the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. (Cf. Appendix III.)

In the second place our result shows that, according to the general theory of relativity, the law of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo, which constitutes one of the two fundamental assumptions in the special theory of relativity and to which we have already frequently referred, cannot claim any unlimited validity. A curvature of rays of light can only take place when the velocity of propagation of light varies with position. Now we might think that as a consequence of this, the special theory of relativity and with it the whole theory of relativity would be laid in the dust. But in reality this is not the case. We can only conclude that the special theory of relativity cannot claim an unlimited domain of validity; its results hold only so long as we are able to disregard the influences of gravitational fields on the phenomena (e.g. of light).

Since it has often been contended by opponents of the theory of relativity that the special theory of relativity is overthrown by the general theory of relativity, it is perhaps advisable to make the facts of the case clearer by means of an appropriate comparison. Before the development of electrodynamics the laws of electrostatics were looked upon as the laws of electricity. At the present time we know that electric fields can be derived correctly from electrostatic considerations only for the case, which is never strictly realised, in which the electrical masses are quite at rest relatively to each other, and to the co-ordinate system. Should we be justified in saying that for this reason electrostatics is overthrown by the field-equations of Maxwell in electrodynamics? Not in the least. Electrostatics is contained in electrodynamics as a limiting case; the laws of the latter lead directly to those of the former for the case in which the fields are invariable with regard to time. No fairer destiny could be allotted to any physical theory, than that it should of itself point out the way to the introduction of a more comprehensive theory, in which it lives on as a limiting case.

In the example of the transmission of light just dealt with, we have seen that the general theory of relativity enables us to derive theoretically the influence of a gravitational field on the course of natural processes, the laws of which are already known when a gravitational field is absent. But the most attractive problem, to the solution of which the general theory of relativity supplies the key, concerns the investigation of the laws satisfied by the gravitational field itself. Let us consider this for a moment.

We are acquainted with space-time domains which behave (approximately) in a “Galileian” fashion under suitable choice of reference-body, i.e. domains in which gravitational fields are absent. If we now refer such a domain to a reference-body K′ possessing any kind of motion, then relative to K′ there exists a gravitational field which is variable with respect to space and time.[17] The character of this field will of course depend on the motion chosen for K′. According to the general theory of relativity, the general law of the gravitational field must be satisfied for all gravitational fields obtainable in this way. Even though by no means all gravitationial fields can be produced in this way, yet we may entertain the hope that the general law of gravitation will be derivable from such gravitational fields of a special kind. This hope has been realised in the most beautiful manner. But between the clear vision of this goal and its actual realisation it was necessary to surmount a serious difficulty, and as this lies deep at the root of things, I dare not withhold it from the reader. We require to extend our ideas of the space-time continuum still farther.



[17]

This follows from a generalisation of the discussion in Section XX.





XXIII.

BEHAVIOUR OF CLOCKS AND MEASURING-RODS ON A ROTATING BODY OF REFERENCE


Hitherto I have purposely refrained from speaking about the physical interpretation of space- and time-data in the case of the general theory of relativity. As a consequence, I am guilty of a certain slovenliness of treatment, which, as we know from the special theory of relativity, is far from being unimportant and pardonable. It is now high time that we remedy this defect; but I would mention at the outset, that this matter lays no small claims on the patience and on the power of abstraction of the reader.

We start off again from quite special cases, which we have frequently used before. Let us consider a space time domain in which no gravitational field exists relative to a reference-body K whose state of motion has been suitably chosen. K is then a Galileian reference-body as regards the domain considered, and the results of the special theory of relativity hold relative to K. Let us suppose the same domain referred to a second body of reference K′, which is rotating uniformly with respect to K. In order to fix our ideas, we shall imagine K′ to be in the form of a plane circular disc, which rotates uniformly in its own plane about its centre. An observer who is sitting eccentrically on the disc K′ is sensible of a force which acts outwards in a radial direction, and which would be interpreted as an effect of inertia (centrifugal force) by an observer who was at rest with respect to the original reference-body K. But the observer on the disc may regard his disc as a reference-body which is “at rest”; on the basis of the general principle of relativity he is justified in doing this. The force acting on himself, and in fact on all other bodies which are at rest relative to the disc, he regards as the effect of a gravitational field. Nevertheless, the space-distribution of this gravitational field is of a kind that would not be possible on Newton’s theory of gravitation.[18] But since the observer believes in the general theory of relativity, this does not disturb him; he is quite in the right when he believes that a general law of gravitation can be formulated—a law which not only explains the motion of the stars correctly, but also the field of force experienced by himself.



[18]

The field disappears at the centre of the disc and increases proportionally to the distance from the centre as we proceed outwards.

The observer performs experiments on his circular disc with clocks and measuring-rods. In doing so, it is his intention to arrive at exact definitions for the signification of time- and space-data with reference to the circular disc K′, these definitions being based on his observations. What will be his experience in this enterprise?

To start with, he places one of two identically constructed clocks at the centre of the circular disc, and the other on the edge of the disc, so that they are at rest relative to it. We now ask ourselves whether both clocks go at the same rate from the standpoint of the non-rotating Galileian reference-body K. As judged from this body, the clock at the centre of the disc has no velocity, whereas the clock at the edge of the disc is in motion relative to K in consequence of the rotation. According to a result obtained in Section XII, it follows that the latter clock goes at a rate permanently slower than that of the clock at the centre of the circular disc, i.e. as observed from K. It is obvious that the same effect would be noted by an observer whom we will imagine sitting alongside his clock at the centre of the circular disc. Thus on our circular disc, or, to make the case more general, in every gravitational field, a clock will go more quickly or less quickly, according to the position in which the clock is situated (at rest). For this reason it is not possible to obtain a reasonable definition of time with the aid of clocks which are arranged at rest with respect to the body of reference. A similar difficulty presents itself when we attempt to apply our earlier definition of simultaneity in such a case, but I do not wish to go any farther into this question.

Moreover, at this stage the definition of the space co-ordinates also presents insurmountable difficulties. If the observer applies his standard measuring-rod (a rod which is short as compared with the radius of the disc) tangentially to the edge of the disc, then, as judged from the Galileian system, the length of this rod will be less than 1, since, according to Section XII, moving bodies suffer a shortening in the direction of the motion. On the other hand, the measuring-rod will not experience a shortening in length, as judged from K, if it is applied to the disc in the direction of the radius. If, then, the observer first measures the circumference of the disc with his measuring-rod and then the diameter of the disc, on dividing the one by the other, he will not obtain as quotient the familiar number π = 3.14 . . ., but a larger number,[19] whereas of course, for a disc which is at rest with respect to K, this operation would yield π exactly. This proves that the propositions of Euclidean geometry cannot hold exactly on the rotating disc, nor in general in a gravitational field, at least if we attribute the length 1 to the rod in all positions and in every orientation. Hence the idea of a straight line also loses its meaning. We are therefore not in a position to define exactly the co-ordinates x, y, z relative to the disc by means of the method used in discussing the special theory, and as long as the co-ordinates and times of events have not been defined, we cannot assign an exact meaning to the natural laws in which these occur.



[19]

Throughout this consideration we have to use the Galileian (non-rotating) system K as reference-body, since we may only assume the validity of the results of the special theory of relativity relative to K (relative to K′ a gravitational field prevails).

Thus all our previous conclusions based on general relativity would appear to be called in question. In reality we must make a subtle detour in order to be able to apply the postulate of general relativity exactly. I shall prepare the reader for this in the following paragraphs.





XXIV.

EUCLIDEAN AND NON-EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM


The surface of a marble table is spread out in front of me. I can get from any one point on this table to any other point by passing continuously from one point to a “neighbouring” one, and repeating this process a (large) number of times, or, in other words, by going from point to point without executing “jumps.” I am sure the reader will appreciate with sufficient clearness what I mean here by “neighbouring” and by “jumps” (if he is not too pedantic). We express this property of the surface by describing the latter as a continuum.

Let us now imagine that a large number of little rods of equal length have been made, their lengths being small compared with the dimensions of the marble slab. When I say they are of equal length, I mean that one can be laid on any other without the ends overlapping. We next lay four of these little rods on the marble slab so that they constitute a quadrilateral figure (a square), the diagonals of which are equally long. To ensure the equality of the diagonals, we make use of a little testing-rod. To this square we add similar ones, each of which has one rod in common with the first. We proceed in like manner with each of these squares until finally the whole marble slab is laid out with squares. The arrangement is such, that each side of a square belongs to two squares and each corner to four squares.

It is a veritable wonder that we can carry out this business without getting into the greatest difficulties. We only need to think of the following. If at any moment three squares meet at a corner, then two sides of the fourth square are already laid, and, as a consequence, the arrangement of the remaining two sides of the square is already completely determined. But I am now no longer able to adjust the quadrilateral so that its diagonals may be equal. If they are equal of their own accord, then this is an especial favour of the marble slab and of the little rods, about which I can only be thankfully surprised. We must experience many such surprises if the construction is to be successful.

If everything has really gone smoothly, then I say that the points of the marble slab constitute a Euclidean continuum with respect to the little rod, which has been used as a “distance” (line-interval). By choosing one corner of a square as “origin” I can characterise every other corner of a square with reference to this origin by means of two numbers. I only need state how many rods I must pass over when, starting from the origin, I proceed towards the “right” and then “upwards,” in order to arrive at the corner of the square under consideration. These two numbers are then the “Cartesian co-ordinates” of this corner with reference to the “Cartesian co-ordinate system” which is determined by the arrangement of little rods.

By making use of the following modification of this abstract experiment, we recognise that there must also be cases in which the experiment would be unsuccessful. We shall suppose that the rods “expand” by in amount proportional to the increase of temperature. We heat the central part of the marble slab, but not the periphery, in which case two of our little rods can still be brought into coincidence at every position on the table. But our construction of squares must necessarily come into disorder during the heating, because the little rods on the central region of the table expand, whereas those on the outer part do not.

With reference to our little rods—defined as unit lengths—the marble slab is no longer a Euclidean continuum, and we are also no longer in the position of defining Cartesian co-ordinates directly with their aid, since the above construction can no longer be carried out. But since there are other things which are not influenced in a similar manner to the little rods (or perhaps not at all) by the temperature of the table, it is possible quite naturally to maintain the point of view that the marble slab is a “Euclidean continuum.” This can be done in a satisfactory manner by making a more subtle stipulation about the measurement or the comparison of lengths.

But if rods of every kind (i.e. of every material) were to behave in the same way as regards the influence of temperature when they are on the variably heated marble slab, and if we had no other means of detecting the effect of temperature than the geometrical behaviour of our rods in experiments analogous to the one described above, then our best plan would be to assign the distance one to two points on the slab, provided that the ends of one of our rods could be made to coincide with these two points; for how else should we define the distance without our proceeding being in the highest measure grossly arbitrary? The method of Cartesian coordinates must then be discarded, and replaced by another which does not assume the validity of Euclidean geometry for rigid bodies.[20] The reader will notice that the situation depicted here corresponds to the one brought about by the general postulate of relativity (Section XXIII).



[20]

Mathematicians have been confronted with our problem in the following form. If we are given a surface (e.g. an ellipsoid) in Euclidean three-dimensional space, then there exists for this surface a two-dimensional geometry, just as much as for a plane surface. Gauss undertook the task of treating this two-dimensional geometry from first principles, without making use of the fact that the surface belongs to a Euclidean continuum of three dimensions. If we imagine constructions to be made with rigid rods in the surface (similar to that above with the marble slab), we should find that different laws hold for these from those resulting on the basis of Euclidean plane geometry. The surface is not a Euclidean continuum with respect to the rods, and we cannot define Cartesian co-ordinates in the surface. Gauss indicated the principles according to which we can treat the geometrical relationships in the surface, and thus pointed out the way to the method of Riemann of treating multi-dimensional, non-Euclidean continuum. Thus it is that mathematicians long ago solved the formal problems to which we are led by the general postulate of relativity.





XXV.

GAUSSIAN CO-ORDINATES





According to Gauss, this combined analytical and geometrical mode of handling the problem can be arrived at in the following way. We imagine a system of arbitrary curves (see Fig. 4) drawn on the surface of the table. These we designate as u-curves, and we indicate each of them by means of a number. The Curves u = 1, u = 2 and u = 3 are drawn in the diagram. Between the curves u = 1 and u = 2 we must imagine an infinitely large number to be drawn, all of which correspond to real numbers lying between 1 and 2. We have then a system of u-curves, and this “infinitely dense” system covers the whole surface of the table. These u-curves must not intersect each other, and through each point of the surface one and only one curve must pass. Thus a perfectly definite value of u belongs to every point on the surface of the marble slab. In like manner we imagine a system of v-curves drawn on the surface. These satisfy the same conditions as the u-curves, they are provided with numbers in a corresponding manner, and they may likewise be of arbitrary shape. It follows that a value of u and a value of v belong to every point on the surface of the table. We call these two numbers the co-ordinates of the surface of the table (Gaussian co-ordinates). For example, the point P in the diagram has the Gaussian co-ordinates u = 3, v = 1. Two neighbouring points P and P′ on the surface then correspond to the co-ordinates

P: u, v

P′: u + du, v + dv,

where du and dv signify very small numbers. In a similar manner we may indicate the distance (line-interval) between P and P′, as measured with a little rod, by means of the very small number ds. Then according to Gauss we have

ds2 = g11du2 + 2g12du dv + g22dv2,

where g11, g12, g22, are magnitudes which depend in a perfectly definite way on u and v. The magnitudes g11, g12 and g22, determine the behaviour of the rods relative to the u-curves and v-curves, and thus also relative to the surface of the table. For the case in which the points of the surface considered form a Euclidean continuum with reference to the measuring-rods, but only in this case, it is possible to draw the u-curves and v-curves and to attach numbers to them, in such a manner, that we simply have:

ds2 = du2 + dv2

Under these conditions, the u-curves and v-curves are straight lines in the sense of Euclidean geometry, and they are perpendicular to each other. Here the Gaussian coordinates are simply Cartesian ones. It is clear that Gauss co-ordinates are nothing more than an association of two sets of numbers with the points of the surface considered, of such a nature that numerical values differing very slightly from each other are associated with neighbouring points “in space.”

So far, these considerations hold for a continuum of two dimensions. But the Gaussian method can be applied also to a continuum of three, four or more dimensions. If, for instance, a continuum of four dimensions be supposed available, we may represent it in the following way. With every point of the continuum, we associate arbitrarily four numbers, x1, x2, x3, x4, which are known as “co-ordinates.” Adjacent points correspond to adjacent values of the coordinates. If a distance ds is associated with the adjacent points P and P′, this distance being measurable and well defined from a physical point of view, then the following formula holds:

ds2 = g11dx12 + 2g12dx1dx2 . . . . + g44dx42,

where the magnitudes g11, etc., have values which vary with the position in the continuum. Only when the continuum is a Euclidean one is it possible to associate the co-ordinates x1 . . x4. with the points of the continuum so that we have simply

ds2 = dx12 + dx22 + dx32 + dx42.

In this case relations hold in the four-dimensional continuum which are analogous to those holding in our three-dimensional measurements.

However, the Gauss treatment for ds2 which we have given above is not always possible. It is only possible when sufficiently small regions of the continuum under consideration may be regarded as Euclidean continua. For example, this obviously holds in the case of the marble slab of the table and local variation of temperature. The temperature is practically constant for a small part of the slab, and thus the geometrical behaviour of the rods is almost as it ought to be according to the rules of Euclidean geometry. Hence the imperfections of the construction of squares in the previous section do not show themselves clearly until this construction is extended over a considerable portion of the surface of the table.

We can sum this up as follows: Gauss invented a method for the mathematical treatment of continua in general, in which “size-relations” (“distances” between neighbouring points) are defined. To every point of a continuum are assigned as many numbers (Gaussian coordinates) as the continuum has dimensions. This is done in such a way, that only one meaning can be attached to the assignment, and that numbers (Gaussian coordinates) which differ by an indefinitely small amount are assigned to adjacent points. The Gaussian coordinate system is a logical generalisation of the Cartesian co-ordinate system. It is also applicable to non-Euclidean continua, but only when, with respect to the defined “size” or “distance,” small parts of the continuum under consideration behave more nearly like a Euclidean system, the smaller the part of the continuum under our notice.





XXVI.

THE SPACE-TIME CONTINUUM OF THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY CONSIDERED AS A EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM


We are now in a position to formulate more exactly the idea of Minkowski, which was only vaguely indicated in Section XVII. In accordance with the special theory of relativity, certain co-ordinate systems are given preference for the description of the four-dimensional, space-time continuum. We called these “Galileian co-ordinate systems.” For these systems, the four co-ordinates x, y, z, t, which determine an event or—in other words—a point of the four-dimensional continuum, are defined physically in a simple manner, as set forth in detail in the first part of this book. For the transition from one Galileian system to another, which is moving uniformly with reference to the first, the equations of the Lorentz transformation are valid. These last form the basis for the derivation of deductions from the special theory of relativity, and in themselves they are nothing more than the expression of the universal validity of the law of transmission of light for all Galileian systems of reference.

Minkowski found that the Lorentz transformations satisfy the following simple conditions. Let us consider two neighbouring events, the relative position of which in the four-dimensional continuum is given with respect to a Galileian reference-body K by the space co-ordinate differences dx, dy, dz and the time-difference dt. With reference to a second Galileian system we shall suppose that the corresponding differences for these two events are dx′, dy′, dz′, dt′. Then these magnitudes always fulfill the condition.[21]



[21]

Cf. Appendixes I and II. The relations which are derived there for the co-ordinates themselves are valid also for co-ordinate differences, and thus also for co-ordinate differentials (indefinitely small differences).

dx2 + dy2 + dz2 – c2dt2 = dx′2 + dy′2 + dz′2 – c2dt′2.

The validity of the Lorentz transformation follows from this condition. We can express this as follows: The magnitude

ds2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2 – c2 dt2,

which belongs to two adjacent points of the four-dimensional space-time continuum, has the same value for all selected (Galileian) reference-bodies. If we replace x, y, z,





by x1, x2, x3, x4, we also obtain the result that

ds2 = dx12 + dx22 + dx32 + dx42.

is independent of the choice of the body of reference. We call the magnitude ds the “distance” apart of the two events or four-dimensional points.

Thus, if we choose as time-variable the imaginary variable





instead of the real quantity t, we can regard the space-time contintium—accordance with the special theory of relativity—as a “Euclidean” four-dimensional continuum, a result which follows from the considerations of the preceding section.





XXVII.

THE SPACE-TIME CONTINUUM OF THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY IS NOT A EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM


In the first part of this book we were able to make use of space-time co-ordinates which allowed of a simple and direct physical interpretation, and which, according to Section XXVI, can be regarded as four-dimensional Cartesian co-ordinates. This was possible on the basis of the law of the constancy of the velocity of light. But according to Section XXI the general theory of relativity cannot retain this law. On the contrary, we arrived at the result that according to this latter theory the velocity of light must always depend on the co-ordinates when a gravitational field is present. In connection with a specific illustration in Section XXIII, we found that the presence of a gravitational field invalidates the definition of the coordinates and the time, which led us to our objective in the special theory of relativity.

In view of the resuIts of these considerations we are led to the conviction that, according to the general principle of relativity, the space-time continuum cannot be regarded as a Euclidean one, but that here we have the general case, corresponding to the marble slab with local variations of temperature, and with which we made acquaintance as an example of a two-dimensional continuum. Just as it was there impossible to construct a Cartesian co-ordinate system from equal rods, so here it is impossible to build up a system (reference-body) from rigid bodies and clocks, which shall be of such a nature that measuring-rods and clocks, arranged rigidly with respect to one another, shall indicate position and time directly. Such was the essence of the difficulty with which we were confronted in Section XXIII.

But the considerations of Sections XXV and XXVI show us the way to surmount this difficulty. We refer the four-dimensional space-time continuum in an arbitrary manner to Gauss co-ordinates. We assign to every point of the continuum (event) four numbers, x1, x2, x3, x4 (co-ordinates), which have not the least direct physical significance, but only serve the purpose of numbering the points of the continuum in a definite but arbitrary manner. This arrangement does not even need to be of such a kind that we must regard x1, x2, x3, as “space” co-ordinates and x4, as a “time” co-ordinate.

The reader may think that such a description of the world would be quite inadequate. What does it mean to assign to an event the particular co-ordinates x1, x2, x3, x4, if in themselves these co-ordinates have no significance? More careful consideration shows, however, that this anxiety is unfounded. Let us consider, for instance, a material point with any kind of motion. If this point had only a momentary existence without duration, then it would to described in space-time by a single system of values x1, x2, x3, x4. Thus its permanent existence must be characterised by an infinitely large number of such systems of values, the co-ordinate values of which are so close together as to give continuity; corresponding to the material point, we thus have a (uni-dimensional) line in the four-dimensional continuum. In the same way, any such lines in our continuum correspond to many points in motion. The only statements having regard to these points which can claim a physical existence are in reality the statements about their encounters. In our mathematical treatment, such an encounter is expressed in the fact that the two lines which represent the motions of the points in question have a particular system of co-ordinate values, x1, x2, x3, x4, in common. After mature consideration the reader will doubtless admit that in reality such encounters constitute the only actual evidence of a time-space nature with which we meet in physical statements.

When we were describing the motion of a material point relative to a body of reference, we stated nothing more than the encounters of this point with particular points of the reference-body. We can also determine the corresponding values of the time by the observation of encounters of the body with clocks, in conjunction with the observation of the encounter of the hands of clocks with particular points on the dials. It is just the same in the case of space-measurements by means of measuring-rods, as a little consideration will show.

The following statements hold generally: Every physical description resolves itself into a number of statements, each of which refers to the space-time coincidence of two events A and B. In terms of Gaussian co-ordinates, every such statement is expressed by the agreement of their four co-ordinates x1, x2, x3, x4. Thus in reality, the description of the time-space continuum by means of Gauss co-ordinates completely replaces the description with the aid of a body of reference, without suffering from the defects of the latter mode of description; it is not tied down to the Euclidean character of the continuum which has to be represented.





XXVIII.

EXACT FORMULATION OF THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY


We are now in a position to replace the provisional formulation of the general principle of relativity given in Section XVIII by an exact formulation. The form there used, “All bodies of reference K, K′, etc., are equivalent for the description of natural phenomena (formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever may be their state of motion,” cannot be maintained, because the use of rigid reference-bodies, in the sense of the method followed in the special theory of relativity, is in general not possible in space-time description. The Gauss co-ordinate system has to take the place of the body of reference. The following statement corresponds to the fundamental idea of the general principle of relativity: “All Gaussian co-ordinate systems are essentially equivalent for the formulation of the general laws of nature.”

We can state this general principle of relativity in still another form, which renders it yet more clearly intelligible than it is when in the form of the natural extension of the special principle of relativity. According to the special theory of relativity, the equations which express the general laws of nature pass over into equations of the same form when, by making use of the Lorentz transformation, we replace the space-time variables x, y, z, t, of a (Galileian) reference-body K by the space-time variables x′, y′, z′, t′, of a new reference-body K′. According to the general theory of relativity, on the other hand, by application of arbitrary substitutions of the Gauss variables x1, x2, x3, x4, the equations must pass over into equations of the same form; for every transformation (not only the Lorentz transformation) corresponds to the transition of one Gauss co-ordinate system into another.

If we desire to adhere to our “old-time” three-dimensional view of things, then we can characterise the development which is being undergone by the fundamental idea of the general theory of relativity as follows: The special theory of relativity has reference to Galileian domains, i.e. to those in which no gravitational field exists. In this connection a Galileian reference-body serves as body of reference, i.e. a rigid body the state of motion of which is so chosen that the Galileian law of the uniform rectilinear motion of “isolated” material points holds relatively to it.

Certain considerations suggest that we should refer the same Galileian domains to non-Galileian reference-bodies also. A gravitational field of a special kind is then present with respect to these bodies (cf. Sections XX and XXIII).

In gravitational fields there are no such things as rigid bodies with Euclidean properties; thus the fictitious rigid body of reference is of no avail in the general theory of relativity. The motion of clocks is also influenced by gravitational fields, and in such a way that a physical definition of time which is made directly with the aid of clocks has by no means the same degree of plausibility as in the special theory of relativity.

For this reason non-rigid reference-bodies are used, which are as a whole not only moving in any way whatsoever, but which also suffer alterations in form ad lib. during their motion. Clocks, for which the law of motion is of any kind, however irregular, serve for the definition of time. We have to imagine each of these clocks fixed at a point on the non-rigid reference-body. These clocks satisfy only the one condition, that the “readings” which are observed simultaneously on adjacent clocks (in space) differ from each other by an indefinitely small amount. This non-rigid reference-body, which might appropriately be termed a “reference-mollusc”, is in the main equivalent to a Gaussian four-dimensional co-ordinate system chosen arbitrarily. That which gives the “mollusc” a certain comprehensibility as compared with the Gauss co-ordinate system is the (really unjustified) formal retention of the separate existence of the

space co-ordinates as opposed to the time co-ordinate. Every point on the mollusc is treated as a space-point, and every material point which is at rest relatively to it as at rest, so long as the mollusc is considered as reference-body. The general principle of relativity requires that all these molluscs can be used as reference-bodies with equal right and equal success in the formulation of the general laws of nature; the laws themselves must be quite independent of the choice of mollusc.

The great power possessed by the general principle of relativity lies in the comprehensive limitation which is imposed on the laws of nature in consequence of what we have seen above.





XXIX.

THE SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM OF GRAVITATION ON THE BASIS OF THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY


If the reader has followed all our previous considerations, he will have no further difficulty in understanding the methods leading to the solution of the problem of gravitation.

We start off on a consideration of a Galileian domain, i.e. a domain in which there is no gravitational field relative to the Galileian reference-body K. The behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks with reference to K is known from the special theory of relativity, likewise the behaviour of “isolated” material points; the latter move uniformly and in straight lines.

Now let us refer this domain to a random Gauss coordinate system or to a “mollusc” as reference-body K′. Then with respect to K′ there is a gravitational field G (of a particular kind). We learn the behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks and also of freely-moving material points with reference to K′ simply by mathematical transformation. We interpret this behaviour as the behaviour of measuring-rods, clocks and material points under the influence of the gravitational field G. Hereupon we introduce a hypothesis: that the influence of the gravitational field on measuring-rods, clocks and freely-moving material points continues to take place according to the same laws, even in the case where the prevailing gravitational field is not derivable from the Galileian special case, simply by means of a transformation of co-ordinates.

The next step is to investigate the space-time behaviour of the gravitational field G, which was derived from the Galileian special case simply by transformation of the coordinates. This behaviour is formulated in a law, which is always valid, no matter how the reference-body (mollusc) used in the description may be chosen.

This law is not yet the general law of the gravitational field, since the gravitational field under consideration is of a special kind. In order to find out the general law-of-field of gravitation we still require to obtain a generalisation of the law as found above. This can be obtained without caprice, however, by taking into consideration the following demands:

(a) The required generalisation must likewise satisfy the general postulate of relativity.

(b) If there is any matter in the domain under consideration, only its inertial mass, and thus according to Section XV only its energy is of importance for its effect in exciting a field.

(c) Gravitational field and matter together must satisfy the law of the conservation of energy (and of impulse).

Finally, the general principle of relativity permits us to determine the influence of the gravitational field on the course of all those processes which take place according to known laws when a gravitational field is absent i.e. which have already been fitted into the frame of the special theory of relativity. In this connection we proceed in principle according to the method which has already been explained for measuring-rods, clocks and freely moving material points.

The theory of gravitation derived in this way from the general postulate of relativity excels not only in its beauty; nor in removing the defect attaching to classical mechanics which was brought to light in Section XXI; nor in interpreting the empirical law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass; but it has also already explained a result of observation in astronomy, against which classical mechanics is powerless.

If we confine the application of the theory to the case where the gravitational fields can be regarded as being weak, and in which all masses move with respect to the coordinate system with velocities which are small compared with the velocity of light, we then obtain as a first approximation the Newtonian theory. Thus the latter theory is obtained here without any particular assumption, whereas Newton had to introduce the hypothesis that the force of attraction between mutually attracting material points is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. If we increase the accuracy of the calculation, deviations from the theory of Newton make their appearance, practically all of which must nevertheless escape the test of observation owing to their smallness.

We must draw attention here to one of these deviations. According to Newton’s theory, a planet moves round the sun in an ellipse, which would permanently maintain its position with respect to the fixed stars, if we could disregard the motion of the fixed stars themselves and the action of the other planets under consideration. Thus, if we correct the observed motion of the planets for these two influences, and if Newton’s theory be strictly correct, we ought to obtain for the orbit of the planet an ellipse, which is fixed with reference to the fixed stars. This deduction, which can be tested with great accuracy, has been confirmed for all the planets save one, with the precision that is capable of being obtained by the delicacy of observation attainable at the present time. The sole exception is Mercury, the planet which lies nearest the sun. Since the time of Leverrier, it has been known that the ellipse corresponding to the orbit of Mercury, after it has been corrected for the influences mentioned above, is not stationary with respect to the fixed stars, but that it rotates exceedingly slowly in the plane of the orbit and in the sense of the orbital motion. The value obtained for this rotary movement of the orbital ellipse was 43 seconds of arc per century, an amount ensured to be correct to within a few seconds of arc. This effect can be explained by means of classical mechanics only on the assumption of hypotheses which have little probability, and which were devised solely for this purponse.

On the basis of the general theory of relativity, it is found that the ellipse of every planet round the sun must necessarily rotate in the manner indicated above; that for all the planets, with the exception of Mercury, this rotation is too small to be detected with the delicacy of observation possible at the present time; but that in the case of Mercury it must amount to 43 seconds of arc per century, a result which is strictly in agreement with observation.

Apart from this one, it has hitherto been possible to make only two deductions from the theory which admit of being tested by observation, to wit, the curvature of light rays by the gravitational field of the sun,[22] and a displacement of the spectral lines of light reaching us from large stars, as compared with the corresponding lines for light produced in an analogous manner terrestrially (i.e. by the same kind of atom).[23] These two deductions from the theory have both been confirmed.



[22]

First observed by Eddington and others in 1919. (Cf. Appendix III).



[23]

Established by Adams in 1924. (Cf. p. 132)





PART III: CONSIDERATIONS ON THE UNIVERSE AS A WHOLE





XXX.

COSMOLOGICAL DIFFICULTIES OF NEWTON’S THEORY


Part from the difficulty discussed in Section XXI, there is a second fundamental difficulty attending classical celestial mechanics, which, to the best of my knowledge, was first discussed in detail by the astronomer Seeliger. If we ponder over the question as to how the universe, considered as a whole, is to be regarded, the first answer that suggests itself to us is surely this: As regards space (and time) the universe is infinite. There are stars everywhere, so that the density of matter, although very variable in detail, is nevertheless on the average everywhere the same. In other words: However far we might travel through space, we should find everywhere an attenuated swarm of fixed stars of approrimately the same kind and density.

This view is not in harmony with the theory of Newton. The latter theory rather requires that the universe should have a kind of centre in which the density of the stars is a maximum, and that as we proceed outwards from this centre the group-density of the stars should diminish, until finally, at great distances, it is succeeded by an infinite region of emptiness. The stellar universe ought to be a finite island in the infinite ocean of space.[24]



[24]

Proof—According to the theory of Newton, the number of “lines of force” which come from infinity and terminate in a mass m is proportional to the mass m. If, on the average, the mass density ρ0 is constant throughout the universe, then a sphere of volume V will enclose the average mass ρ0V. Thus the number of lines of force passing through the surface F of the sphere into its interior is proportional to ρ0V. For unit area of the surface of the sphere the number of lines of force which enters the sphere is thus proportional to ρ0V/F or to ρ0R. Hence the intensity of the field at the surface would ultimately become infinite with increasing radius R of the sphere, which is impossible.

This conception is in itself not very satisfactory. It is still less satisfactory because it leads to the result that the light emitted by the stars and also individual stars of the stellar system are perpetually passing out into infinite space, never to return, and without ever again coming into interaction with other objects of nature. Such a finite material universe would be destined to become gradually but systematically impoverished.

In order to escape this dilemma, Seeliger suggested a modification of Newton’s law, in which he assumes that for great distances the force of attraction between two masses diminishes more rapidly than would result from the inverse square law. In this way it is possible for the mean density of matter to be constant everywhere, even to infinity, without infinitely large gravitational fields being produced. We thus free ourselves from the distasteful conception that the material universe ought to possess something of the nature of a centre. Of course we purchase our emancipation from the fundamental difficulties mentioned, at the cost of a modification and complication of Newton’s law which has neither empirical nor theoretical foundation. We can imagine innumerable laws which would serve the same purpose, without our being able to state a reason why one of them is to be preferred to the others; for any one of these laws would be founded just as little on more general theoretical principles as is the law of Newton.





XXXI.

THE POSSIBILITY OF A “FINITE” AND YET “UNBOUNDED” UNIVERSE


But speculations on the structure of the universe also move in quite another direction. The development of non-Euclidean geometry led to the recognition of the fact, that we can cast doubt on the infiniteness of our space without coming into conflict with the laws of thought or with experience (Riemann, Helmholtz). These questions have already been treated in detail and with unsurpassable lucidity by Helmholtz and Poincaré, whereas I can only touch on them briefly here.

In the first place, we imagine an existence in two dimensional space. Flat beings with flat implements, and in particular flat rigid measuring-rods, are free to move in a plane. For them nothing exists outside of this plane: that which they observe to happen to themselves and to their flat “things” is the all-inclusive reality of their plane. In particular, the constructions of plane Euclidean geometry can be carried out by means of the rods e.g. the lattice construction, considered in Section XXIV. In contrast to ours, the universe of these beings is two-dimensional; but, like ours, it extends to infinity. In their universe there is room for an infinite number of identical squares made up of rods, i.e. its volume (surface) is infinite. If these beings say their universe is “plane,” there is sense in the statement, because they mean that they can perform the constructions of plane Euclidean geometry with their rods. In this connection the individual rods always represent the same distance, independently of their position.

Let us consider now a second two-dimensional existence, but this time on a spherical surface instead of on a plane. The flat beings with their measuring-rods and other objects fit exactly on this surface and they are unable to leave it. Their whole universe of observation extends exclusively over the surface of the sphere. Are these beings able to regard the geometry of their universe as being plane geometry and their rods withal as the realisation of “distance”? They cannot do this. For if they attempt to realise a straight line, they will obtain a curve, which we “three-dimensional beings” designate as a great circle, i.e. a self-contained line of definite finite length, which can be measured up by means of a measuring-rod. Similarly, this universe has a finite area that can be compared with the area, of a square constructed with rods. The great charm resulting from this consideration lies in the recognition of the fact that the universe of these beings is finite and yet has no limits.

But the spherical-surface beings do not need to go on a world-tour in order to perceive that they are not living in a Euclidean universe. They can convince themselves of this on every part of their “world,” provided they do not use too small a piece of it. Starting from a point, they draw “straight lines” (arcs of circles as judged in three dimensional space) of equal length in all directions. They will call the line joining the free ends of these lines a “circle.” For a plane surface, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter, both lengths being measured with the same rod, is, according to Euclidean geometry of the plane, equal to a constant value π, which is independent of the diameter of the circle. On their spherical surface our flat beings would find for this ratio the value





i.e. a smaller value than π, the difference being the more considerable, the greater is the radius of the circle in comparison with the radius R of the “world-sphere.” By means of this relation the spherical beings can determine the radius of their universe (“world”), even when only a relatively small part of their worldsphere is available for their measurements. But if this part is very small indeed, they will no longer be able to demonstrate that they are on a spherical “world” and not on a Euclidean plane, for a small part of a spherical surface differs only slightly from a piece of a plane of the same size.

Thus if the spherical surface beings are living on a planet of which the solar system occupies only a negligibly small part of the spherical universe, they have no means of determining whether they are living in a finite or in an infinite universe, because the “piece of universe” to which they have access is in both cases practically plane, or Euclidean. It follows directly from this discussion, that for our sphere-beings the circumference of a circle first increases with the radius until the “circumference of the universe” is reached, and that it thenceforward gradually decreases to zero for still further increasing values of the radius. During this process the area of the circle continues to increase more and more, until finally it becomes equal to the total area of the whole “world-sphere.”

Perhaps the reader will wonder why we have placed our “beings” on a sphere rather than on another closed surface. But this choice has its justification in the fact that, of all closed surfaces, the sphere is unique in possessing the property that all points on it are equivalent. I admit that the ratio of the circumference c of a circle to its radius r depends on r, but for a given value of r it is the same for all points of the “worldsphere”; in other words, the “world-sphere” is a “surface of constant curvature.”

To this two-dimensional sphere-universe there is a three-dimensional analogy, namely, the three-dimensional spherical space which was discovered by Riemann. its points are likewise all equivalent. It possesses a finite volume, which is determined by its “radius” (2π2R3). Is it possible to imagine a spherical space? To imagine a space means nothing else than that we imagine an epitome of our “space” experience, i.e. of experience that we can have in the movement of “rigid” bodies. In this sense we can imagine a spherical space.

Suppose we draw lines or stretch strings in all directions from a point, and mark off from each of these the distance r with a measuring-rod. All the free end-points of these lengths lie on a spherical surface. We can specially measure up the area (F) of this surface by means of a square made up of measuring-rods. If the universe is Euclidean, then F = 4πr2; if it is spherical, then F is always less than 4πr2. With increasing values of r, F increases from zero up to a maximum value which is determined by the “world-radius,” but for still further increasing values of r, the area gradually diminishes to zero. At first, the straight lines which radiate from the starting point diverge farther and farther from one another, but later they approach each other, and finally they run together again at a “counter-point” to the starting point. Under such conditions they have traversed the whole spherical space. It is easily seen that the three-dimensional spherical space is quite analogous to the two-dimensional spherical surface. It is finite (i.e. of finite volume), and has no bounds.

It may be mentioned that there is yet another kind of curved space: “elliptical space.” It can be regarded as a curved space in which the two “counter-points” are identical (indistinguishable from each other). An elliptical universe can thus be considered to some extent as a curved universe possessing central symmetry.

It follows from what has been said, that closed spaces without limits are conceivable. From amongst these, the spherical space (and the elliptical) excels in its simplicity, since all points on it are equivalent. As a result of this discussion, a most interesting question arises for astronomers and physicists, and that is whether the universe in which we live is infinite, or whether it is finite in the manner of the spherical universe. Our experience is far from being sufficient to enable us to answer this question. But the general theory of relativity permits of our answering it with a moderate degree of certainty, and in this connection the difficulty mentioned in Section XXX finds its solution.





XXXII.

THE STRUCTURE OF SPACE ACCORDING TO THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY


According to the general theory of relativity, the geometrical properties of space are not independent, but they are determined by matter. Thus we can draw conclusions about the geometrical structure of the universe only if we base our considerations on the state of the matter as being something that is known. We know from experience that, for a suitably chosen co-ordinate system, the velocities of the stars are small as compared with the velocity of transmission of light. We can thus as a rough approximation arrive at a conclusion as to the nature of the universe as a whole, if we treat the matter as being at rest.

We already know from our previous discussion that the behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks is influenced by gravitational fields, i.e. by the distribution of matter. This in itself is sufficient to exclude the possibility of the exact validity of Euclidean geometry in our universe. But it is conceivable that our universe differs only slightly from a Euclidean one, and this notion seems all the more probable, since calculations show that the metrics of surrounding space is influenced only to an exceedingly small extent by masses even of the magnitude of our sun. We might imagine that, as regards geometry, our universe behaves analogously to a surface which is irregularly curved in its individual parts, but which nowhere departs appreciably from a plane: something like the rippled surface of a lake. Such a universe might fittingly be called a quasi-Euclidean universe. As regards its space it would be infinite. But calculation shows that in a quasi-Euclidean universe the average density of matter would necessarily be nil. Thus such a universe could not be inhabited by matter everywhere; it would present to us that unsatisfactory picture which we portrayed in Section XXX.

If we are to have in the universe an average density of matter which differs from zero, however small may be that difference, then the universe cannot be quasi-Euclidean. On the contrary, the results of calculation indicate that if matter be distributed uniformly, the universe would necessarily be spherical (or elliptical). Since in reality the detailed distribution of matter is not uniform, the real universe will deviate in individual parts from the spherical, i.e. the universe will be quasi-spherical. But it will be necessarily finite. In fact, the theory supplies us with a simple connection[25] between the space-expanse of the universe and the average density of matter in it.



[25]

For the radius R of the universe we obtain the equation





The use of the C.G.S. system in this equation gives 2/k = 1.08 x 1027; ρ is the average density of the matter and k is a constant connected with the Newtonian constant of gravitation.





APPENDICES





APPENDIX I

SIMPLE DERIVATION OF THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

(SUPPLEMENTARY TO SECTION XI)


For the relative orientation of the co-ordinate systems indicated in Fig. 2, the x-axes of both systems permanently coincide. In the present case we can divide the problem into parts by considering first only events which are localised on the x-axis. Any such event is represented with respect to the co-ordinate system K by the abscissa x and the time t, and with respect to the system K′ by the abscissa x′ and the time t′. We require to find x′ and t′ when x and t are given.

A light-signal, which is proceeding along the positive axis of x, is transmitted according to the equation

x = ct

or

x – ct = 0 . . . . . (1).

Since the same light-signal has to be transmitted relative to K′ with the velocity c, the propagation relative to the system K′ will be represented by the analogous formula

x′ – ct′ = 0 . . . . . (2)

Those space-time points (events) which satisfy (1) must also satisfy (2). Obviously this will be the case when the relation

(x′ – ct′) = λ(x – ct) . . . (3).

is fulfilled in general, where λ indicates a constant; for, according to (3), the disappearance of (x – ct) involves the disappearance of (x′ – ct′).

If we apply quite similar considerations to light rays which are being transmitted along the negative x-axis, we obtain the condition

(x′ + ct′) = (x + ct) . . . (4).

By adding (or subtracting) equations (3) and (4), and introducing for convenience the constants a and b in place of the constants λ and μ where





and





we obtain the equations





We should thus have the solution of our problem, if the constants a and b were known. These result from the following discussion.

For the origin of K′ we have permanently x′ = 0, and hence according to the first of the equations (5)





If we call v the velocity with which the origin of K′ is moving relative to K, we then have





The same value v can be obtained from equations (5), if we calculate the velocity of another point of K′ relative to K, or the velocity (directed towards the negative x-axis) of a point of K with respect to K′. In short, we can designate v as the relative velocity of the two systems.

Furthermore, the principle of relativity teaches us that, as judged from K, the length of a unit measuring-rod which is at rest with reference to K′ must be exactly the same as the length, as judged from K′, of a unit measuring-rod which is at rest relative to K. In order to see how the points of the x′-axis appear as viewed from K, we only require to take a “snapshot” of K′ from K; this means that we have to insert a particular value of t (time of K), e.g. t = 0. For this value of t we then obtain from the first of the equations (5)

x′ = ax

Two points of the x′-axis which are separated by the distance Δx′ = 1 when measured in the K′ system are thus separated in our instantaneous photograph by the distance





But if the snapshot be taken from K′(t′ = 0), and if we eliminate t from the equations (5), taking into account the expression (6), we obtain





From this we conclude that two points on the x-axis separated by the distance 1 (relative to K) will be represented on our snapshot by the distance





But from what has been said, the two snapshots must be identical; hence Δx in (7) must be equal to Δx′ in (7a), so that we obtain





The equations (6) and (7b) determine the constants a and b. By inserting the values of these constants in (5), we obtain the first and the fourth of the equations given in Section XI.





Thus we have obtained the Lorentz transformation for events on the x-axis. It satisfies the condition

x′2 – c2t′2 = x2 – c2t2 . . . . . . (8a).

The extension of this result, to include events which take place outside the x-axis, is obtained by retaining equations (8) and supplementing them by the relations





In this way we satisfy the postulate of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo for rays of light of arbitrary direction, both for the system K and for the system K′. This may be shown in the following manner.

We suppose a light-signal sent out from the origin of K at the time t = 0. It will be propagated according to the equation





or, if we square this equation, according to the equation

x2 + y2 + z2 – c2t2 = 0 . . . . . (10).

It is required by the law of propagation of light, in conjunction with the postulate of relativity, that the transmission of the signal in question should take place—as judged from K′—in accordance with the corresponding formula

r′ = ct′

or,

x′2 + y′2 + z′2 – c2t′2 = 0 . . . . . . (10a).

In order that equation (10a) may be a consequence of equation (10), we must have

x′2 + y′2 + z′2 – c2t′2 = σ (x2 + y2 + z2 – c2t2) (11).

Since equation (8a) must hold for points on the x-axis, we thus have σ = 1. It is easily seen that the Lorentz transformation really satisfies equation (11) for σ = 1; for (11) is a consequence of (8a) and (9), and hence also of (8) and (9). We have thus derived the Lorentz transformation.

The Lorentz transformation represented by (8) and (9) still requires to be generalised. Obviously it is immaterial whether the axes of K′ be chosen so that they are spatially parallel to those of K. It is also not essential that the velocity of translation of K′ with respect to K should be in the direction of the x-axis. A simple consideration shows that we are able to construct the Lorentz transformation in this general sense from two kinds of transformations, viz. from Lorentz transformations in the special sense and from purely spatial transformations. which corresponds to the replacement of the rectangular co-ordinate system by a new system with its axes pointing in other directions.

Mathematically, we can characterise the generalised Lorentz transformation thus:

It expresses x′, y′, x′, t′, in terms of linear homogeneous functions of x, y, x, t, of such a kind that the relation

x′2 + y′2 + z′2 – c2t′2 = x2 + y2 + z2 – c2t2 (11a).

is satisficd identically. That is to say: If we substitute their expressions in x, y, x, t, in place of x′, y′, x′, t′, on the left-hand side, then the left-hand side of (11a) agrees with the right-hand side.





APPENDIX II

MINKOWSKI’S FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE (“WORLD”)

(SUPPLEMENTARY TO SECTION XVII)


We can characterise the Lorentz transformation still more simply if we introduce the imaginary





in place of t, as time-variable. If, in accordance with this, we insert





and similarly for the accented system K′, then the condition which is identically satisfied by the transformation can be expressed thus:

x1′2 + x2′2 + x3′2 + x4′2 = x12 + x22 + x32 + x42 (12).

That is, by the afore-mentioned choice of “coordinates,” (11a) [see the end of Appendix II] is transformed into this equation.

We see from (12) that the imaginary time co-ordinate x4, enters into the condition of transformation in exactly the same way as the space co-ordinates x1, x2, x3. It is due to this fact that, according to the theory of relativity, the “time” x4, enters into natural laws in the same form as the space co ordinates x1, x2, x3.

A four-dimensional continuum described by the “co-ordinates” x1, x2, x3, x4, was called “world” by Minkowski, who also termed a point-event a “world-point.” From a “happening” in three-dimensional space, physics becomes, as it were, an “existence” in the four-dimensional “world.”

This four-dimensional “world” bears a close similarity to the three-dimensional “space” of (Euclidean) analytical geometry. If we introduce into the latter a new Cartesian co-ordinate system (x′1, x′2, x′3) with the same origin, then x′1, x′2, x′3, are linear homogeneous functions of x1, x2, x3 which identically satisfy the equation

x1′2 + x2′2 + x3′2 = x12 + x22 + x32

The analogy with (12) is a complete one. We can regard Minkowski’s “world” in a formal manner as a four-dimensional Euclidean space (with an imaginary time coordinate); the Lorentz transformation corresponds to a “rotation” of the co-ordinate system in the four-dimensional “world.”





APPENDIX III

THE EXPERIMENTAL CONFIRMATION OF THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY


From a systematic theoretical point of view, we may imagine the process of evolution of an empirical science to be a continuous process of induction. Theories are evolved and are expressed in short compass as statements of a large number of individual observations in the form of empirical laws, from which the general laws can be ascertained by comparison. Regarded in this way, the development of a science bears some resemblance to the compilation of a classified catalogue. It is, as it were, a purely empirical enterprise.

But this point of view by no means embraces the whole of the actual process; for it slurs over the important part played by intuition and deductive thought in the development of an exact science. As soon as a science has emerged from its initial stages, theoretical advances are no longer achieved merely by a process of arrangement. Guided by empirical data, the investigator rather develops a system of thought which, in general, is built up logically from a small number of fundamental assumptions, the so-called axioms. We call such a system of thought a theory. The theory finds the justification for its existence in the fact that it correlates a large number of single observations, and it is just here that the “truth” of the theory lies.

Corresponding to the same complex of empirical data, there may be several theories, which differ from one another to a considerable extent. But as regards the deductions from the theories which are capable of being tested, the agreement between the theories may be so complete that it becomes difficult to find any deductions in which the two theories differ from each other. As an example, a case of general interest is available in the province of biology, in the Darwinian theory of the development of species by selection in the struggle for existence, and in the theory of development which is based on the hypothesis of the hereditary transmission of acquired characters.

We have another instance of far-reaching agreement between the deductions from two theories in Newtonian mechanics on the one hand, and the general theory of relativity on the other. This agreement goes so far, that up to the present we have been able to find only a few deductions from the general theory of relativity which are capable of investigation, and to which the physics of pre-relativity days does not also lead, and this despite the profound difference in the fundamental assumptions of the two theories. In what follows, we shall again consider these important deductions, and we shall also discuss the empirical evidence appertaining to them which has hitherto been obtained.





(a) Motion of the Perihelion of Mercury


According to Newtonian mechanics and Newton’s law of gravitation, a planet which is revolving round the sun would describe an ellipse round the latter, or, more correctly, round the common centre of gravity of the sun and the planet. In such a system, the sun, or the common centre of gravity, lies in one of the foci of the orbital ellipse in such a manner that, in the course of a planet-year, the distance sun-planet grows from a minimum to a maximum, and then decreases again to a minimum. If instead of Newton’s law we insert a somewhat different law of attraction into the calculation, we find that, according to this new law, the motion would still take place in such a manner that the distance sun-planet exhibits periodic variations; but in this case the angle described by the line joining sun and planet during such a period (from perihelion—closest proximity to the sun—to perihelion) would differ from 360°. The line of the orbit would not then be a closed one but in the course of time it would fill up an annular part of the orbital plane, viz. between the circle of least and the circle of greatest distance of the planet from the sun.

According also to the general theory of relativity, which differs of course from the theory of Newton, a small variation from the Newton-Kepler motion of a planet in its orbit should take place, and in such away, that the angle described by the radius sun-planet between one perhelion and the next should exceed that corresponding to one complete revolution by an amount given by





(N.B.—One complete revolution corresponds to the angle 2π in the absolute angular measure customary in physics, and the above expression given the amount by which the radius sun-planet exceeds this angle during the interval between one perihelion and the next.) In this expression a represents the major semi-axis of the ellipse, e its eccentricity, c the velocity of light, and T the period of revolution of the planet. Our result may also be stated as follows: According to the general theory of relativity, the major axis of the ellipse rotates round the sun in the same sense as the orbital motion of the planet. Theory requires that this rotation should amount to 43 seconds of arc per century for the planet Mercury, but for the other Planets of our solar system its magnitude should be so small that it would necessarily escape detection.[26]



[26]

Especially since the next planet Venus has an orbit that is almost an exact circle, which makes it more difficult to locate the perihelion with precision.

In point of fact, astronomers have found that the theory of Newton does not suffice to calculate the observed motion of Mercury with an exactness corresponding to that of the delicacy of observation attainable at the present time. After taking account of all the disturbing influences exerted on Mercury by the remaining planets, it was found (Leverrier: 1859; and Newcomb: 1895) that an unexplained perihelial movement of the orbit of Mercury remained over, the amount of which does not differ sensibly from the above mentioned +43 seconds of arc per century. The uncertainty of the empirical result amounts to a few seconds only.





(b) Deflection of Light by a Gravitational Field





In Section XXII it has been already mentioned that according to the general theory of relativity, a ray of light will experience a curvature of its path when passing through a gravitational field, this curvature being similar to that experienced by the path of a body which is projected through a gravitational field. As a result of this theory, we should expect that a ray of light which is passing close to a heavenly body would be deviated towards the latter. For a ray of light which passes the sun at a distance of Δ sun-radii from its centre, the angle of deflection (α) should amount to





It may be added that, according to the theory, half of this deflection is produced by the Newtonian field of attraction of the sun, and the other half by the geometrical modification (“curvature”) of space caused by the sun.

This result admits of an experimental test by means of the photographic registration of stars during a total eclipse of the sun. The only reason why we must wait for a total eclipse is because at every other time the atmosphere is so strongly illuminated by the light from the sun that the stars situated near the sun’s disc are invisible. The predicted effect can be seen clearly from the accompanying diagram. If the sun (S) were not present, a star which is practically infinitely distant would be seen in the direction D1, as observed front the earth. But as a consequence of the deflection of light from the star by the sun, the star will be seen in the direction D2, i.e. at a somewhat greater distance from the centre of the sun than corresponds to its real position.

In practice, the question is tested in the following way. The stars in the neighbourhood of the sun are photographed during a solar eclipse.

In addition, a second photograph of the same stars is taken when the sun is situated at another position in the sky, i.e. a few months earlier or later. As compared with the standard photograph, the positions of the stars on the eclipse-photograph ought to appear displaced radially outwards (away from the centre of the sun) by an amount corresponding to the angle a.

We are indebted to the [British] Royal Society and to the Royal Astronomical Society for the investigation of this important deduction. Undaunted by the [first world] war and by difficulties of both a material and a psychological nature aroused by the war, these societies equipped two expeditions—to Sobral (Brazil), and to the island of Principe (West Africa)—and sent several of Britain’s most celebrated astronomers (Eddington, Cottingham, Crommelin, Davidson), in order to obtain photographs of the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. The relative discrepancies to be expected between the stellar photographs obtained during the eclipse and the comparison photographs amounted to a few hundredths of a millimetre only. Thus great accuracy was necessary in making the adjustments required for the taking of the photographs, and in their subsequent measurement.

The results of the measurements confirmed the theory in a thoroughly satisfactory manner. The rectangular components of the observed and of the calculated deviations of the stars (in seconds of arc) are set forth in the following table of results:





(c) Displacement of Spectral Lines Towards the Red


In Section XXIII it has been shown that in a system K′ which is in rotation with regard to a Galileian system K, clocks of identical construction, and which are considered at rest with respect to the rotating reference-body, go at rates which are dependent on the positions of the clocks. We shall now examine this dependence quantitatively. A clock, which is situated at a distance r from the centre of the disc, has a velocity relative to K which is given by

v = ωr,

where ω represents the angular velocity of rotation of the disc K′ with respect to K. If v0, represents the number of ticks of the clock per unit time (“rate” of the clock) relative to K when the clock is at rest, then the “rate” of the clock (v) when it is moving relative to K with a velocity v, but at rest with respect to the disc, will, in accordance with Section XII, be given by





or with sufficient accuracy by





This expression may also be stated in the following form:





If we represent the difference of potential of the centrifugal force between the position of the clock and the centre of the disc by φ, i.e. the work, considered negatively, which must be performed on the unit of mass against the centrifugal force in order to transport it from the position of the clock on the rotating disc to the centre of the disc, then we have





From this it follows that





In the first place, we see from this expression that two clocks of identical construction will go at different rates when situated at different distances from the centre of the disc. This result is also valid from the standpoint of an observer who is rotating with the disc.

Now, as judged from the disc, the latter is in a gravitational field of potential φ, hence the result we have obtained will hold quite generally for gravitational fields. Furthermore, we can regard an atom which is emitting spectral lines as a clock, so that the following statement will hold:

An atom absorbs or emits light of a frequency which is dependent on the potential of the gravitational field in which it is situated.

The frequency of an atom situated on the surface of a heavenly body will be somewhat less than the frequency of an atom of the same element which is situated in free space (or on the surface of a smaller celestial body).

Now φ = – K (M/r), where K is Newton’s constant of gravitation, and M is the mass of the heavenly body. Thus a displacement towards the red ought to take place for spectral lines produced at the surface of stars as compared with the spectral lines of the same element produced at the surface of the earth, the amount of this displacement being





For the sun, the displacement towards the red predicted by theory amounts to about two millionths of the wave-length. A trustworthy calculation is not possible in the case of the stars, because in general neither the mass M nor the radius r are known.

It is an open question whether or not this effect exists, and at the present time (1920) astronomers are working with great zeal towards the solution. Owing to the smallness of the effect in the case of the sun, it is difficult to form an opinion as to its existence. Whereas Grebe and Bachem (Bonn), as a result of their own measurements and those of Evershed and Schwarzschild on the cyanogen bands, have placed the existence of the effect almost beyond doubt, while other investigators, particularly St. John, have been led to the opposite opinion in consequence of their measurements.

Mean displacements of lines towards the less refrangible end of the spectrum are certainly revealed by statistical investigations of the fixed stars; but up to the present the examination of the available data does not allow of any definite decision being arrived at, as to whether or not these displacements are to be referred in reality to the effect of gravitation. The results of observation have been collected together, and discussed in detail from the standpoint of the question which has been engaging our attention here, in a paper by E. Freundlich entitled “Zur Prüfung der allgemeinen Relativitäts-Theorie” (Die Naturwissenschaften, 1919, No. 35, p. 520: Julius Springer, Berlin).

At all events, a definite decision will be reached during the next few years. If the displacement of spectral lines towards the red by the gravitational potential does not exist, then the general theory of relativity will be untenable. On the other hand, if the cause of the displacement of spectral lines be definitely traced to the gravitational potential, then the study of this displacement will furnish us with important information as to the mass of the heavenly bodies.[27]



[27]

The displacement of spectral lines towards the red end of the spectrum was definitely established by Adams in 1924, by observations on the dense companion of Sirius, for which the effect is about thirty times greater than for the Sun. R.W.L.—translator





APPENDIX IV

THE STRUCTURE OF SPACE ACCORDING TO THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

(SUPPLEMENTARY TO SECTION XXXII)


Since the publication of the first edition of this little book, our knowledge about the structure of space in the large (“cosmological problem”) has had an important development, which ought to be mentioned even in a popular presentation of the subject.

My original considerations on the subject were based on two hypotheses:

(1) There exists an average density of matter in the whole of space which is everywhere the same and different from zero.

(2) The magnitude (“radius”) of space is independent of time.

Both these hypotheses proved to be consistent, according to the general theory of relativity, but only after a hypothetical term was added to the field equations, a term which was not required by the theory as such nor did it seem natural from a theoretical point of view (“cosmological term of the field equations”).

Hypothesis (2) appeared unavoidable to me at the time, since I thought that one would get into bottomless speculations if one departed from it.

However, already in the ’twenties, the Russian mathematician Friedman showed that a different hypothesis was natural from a purely theoretical point of view. He realized that it was possible to preserve hypothesis (1) without introducing the less natural cosmological term into the field equations of gravitation, if one was ready to drop hypothesis (2). Namely, the original field equations admit a solution in which the “world radius” depends on time (expanding space). In that sense one can say, according to Friedman, that the theory demands an expansion of space.

A few years later Hubble showed, by a special investigation of the extra-galactic nebulae (“milky ways”), that the spectral lines emitted showed a red shift which increased regularly with the distance of the nebulae. This can be interpreted in regard to our present knowledge only in the sense of Doppler’s principle, as an expansive motion of the system of stars in the large—as required, according to Friedman, by the field equations of gravitation. Hubble’s discovery can, therefore, be considered to some extent as a confirmation of the theory.

There does arise, however, a strange difficulty. The interpretation of the galactic line-shift discovered by Hubble as an expansion (which can hardly be doubted from a theoretical point of view), leads to an origin of this expansion which lies “only” about 109 years ago, while physical astronomy makes it appear likely that the development of individual stars and systems of stars takes considerably longer. It is in no way known how this incongruity is to be overcome.

I further want to remark that the theory of expanding space, together with the empirical data of astronomy, permit no decision to be reached about the finite or infinite character of (three-dimensional) space, while the original “static” hypothesis of space yielded the closure (finiteness) of space.

K = co-ordinate system

x, y = two-dimensional co-ordinates

x, y, z = three-dimensional co-ordinates

x, y, z, t = four-dimensional co-ordinates

t = time

I = distance

v = velocity

F = force

G = gravitational field





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RELATIVITY: THE SPECIAL AND GENERAL THEORY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE





THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.



1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.



1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Meaning of Relativity


This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

Title: The Meaning of Relativity

Author: Albert Einstein

Translator: Edwin P. Adams



Release date: May 29, 2011 [eBook #36276]

Most recently updated: June 4, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Andrew D. Hwang, updated for HTML+SVG by Laura Natal Rodrigues




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEANING OF RELATIVITY ***





THE MEANING OF

RELATIVITY





FOUR LECTURES DELIVERED AT PRINCETON UNIVERSITY, MAY, 1921





BY

ALBERT EINSTEIN





WITH FOUR DIAGRAMS





PRINCETON

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS

1923





Copyright 1922 Princeton University Press Published 1922





NOTE.—The translation of these lectures into English was made by EDWIN PLIMPTON ADAMS, Professor of Physics in Princeton University





CONTENTS


LECTURE I

SPACE AND TIME IN PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS

LECTURE II

THE THEORY OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY

LECTURE III

THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

LECTURE IV

THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY (continued)

INDEX





THE MEANING OF RELATIVITY





LECTURE I



SPACE AND TIME IN PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS


THE theory of relativity is intimately connected with the theory of space and time. I shall therefore begin with a brief investigation of the origin of our ideas of space and time, although in doing so I know that I introduce a controversial subject. The object of all science, whether natural science or psychology, is to co-ordinate our experiences and to bring them into a logical system. How are our customary ideas of space and time related to the character of our experiences?

The experiences of an individual appear to us arranged in a series of events; in this series the single events which we remember appear to be ordered according to the criterion of "earlier" and "later," which cannot be analysed further. There exists, therefore, for the individual, an I-time, or subjective time. This in itself is not measurable. I can, indeed, associate numbers with the events, in such a way that a greater number is associated with the later event than with an earlier one; but the nature of this association may be quite arbitrary. This association I can define by means of a clock by comparing the order of events furnished by the clock with the order of the given series of events. We understand by a clock something which provides a series of events which can be counted, and which has other properties of which we shall speak later.

By the aid of speech different individuals can, to a certain extent, compare their experiences. In this way it is shown that certain sense perceptions of different individuals correspond to each other, while for other sense perceptions no such correspondence can be established. We are accustomed to regard as real those sense perceptions which are common to different individuals, and which therefore are, in a measure, impersonal. The natural sciences, and in particular, the most fundamental of them, physics, deal with such sense perceptions. The conception of physical bodies, in particular of rigid bodies, is a relatively constant complex of such sense perceptions. A clock is also a body, or a system, in the same sense, with the additional property that the series of events which it counts is formed of elements all of which can be regarded as equal.

The only justification for our concepts and system of concepts is that they serve to represent the complex of our experiences; beyond this they have no legitimacy. I am convinced that the philosophers have had a harmful effect upon the progress of scientific thinking in removing certain fundamental concepts from the domain of empiricism, where they are under our control, to the intangible heights of the a priori. For even if it should appear that the universe of ideas cannot be deduced from experience by logical means, but is, in a sense, a creation of the human mind, without which no science is possible, nevertheless this universe of ideas is just as little independent of the nature of our experiences as clothes are of the form of the human body. This is particularly true of our concepts of time and space, which physicists have been obliged by the facts to bring down from the Olympus of the a priori in order to adjust them and put them in a serviceable condition.

We now come to our concepts and judgments of space. It is essential here also to pay strict attention to the relation of experience to our concepts. It seems to me that Poincaré clearly recognized the truth in the account he gave in his book, "La Science et l'Hypothèse." Among all the changes which we can perceive in a rigid body those are marked by their simplicity which can be made reversibly by an arbitrary motion of the body; Poincaré calls these, changes in position. By means of simple changes in position we can bring two bodies into contact. The theorems of congruence, fundamental in geometry, have to do with the laws that govern such changes in position. For the concept of space the following seems essential. We can form new bodies by bringing bodies , , ... up to body ; we say that we continue body . We can continue body in such a way that it comes into contact with any other body, . The ensemble of all continuations of body we can designate as the "space of the body ." Then it is true that all bodies are in the "space of the (arbitrarily chosen) body ." In this sense we cannot speak of space in the abstract, but only of the "space belonging to a body ." The earth's crust plays such a dominant rôle in our daily life in judging the relative positions of bodies that it has led to an abstract conception of space which certainly cannot be defended. In order to free ourselves from this fatal error we shall speak only of "bodies of reference," or "space of reference." It was only through the theory of general relativity that refinement of these concepts became necessary, as we shall see later.

I shall not go into detail concerning those properties of the space of reference which lead to our conceiving points as elements of space, and space as a continuum. Nor shall I attempt to analyse further the properties of space which justify the conception of continuous series of points, or lines. If these concepts are assumed, together with their relation to the solid bodies of experience, then it is easy to say what we mean by the three-dimensionality of space; to each point three numbers, , , (co-ordinates), may be associated, in such a way that this association is uniquely reciprocal, and that , and vary continuously when the point describes a continuous series of points (a line).

It is assumed in pre-relativity physics that the laws of the orientation of ideal rigid bodies are consistent with Euclidean geometry. What this means may be expressed as follows: Two points marked on a rigid body form an interval. Such an interval can be oriented at rest, relatively to our space of reference, in a multiplicity of ways. If, now, the points of this space can be referred to co-ordinates , , , in such a way that the differences of the co-ordinates, , , , of the two ends of the interval furnish the same sum of squares,

for every orientation of the interval, then the space of reference is called Euclidean, and the co-ordinates Cartesian.[1] It is sufficient, indeed, to make this assumption in the limit for an infinitely small interval. Involved in this assumption there are some which are rather less special, to which we must call attention on account of their fundamental significance. In the first place, it is assumed that one can move an ideal rigid body in an arbitrary manner. In the second place, it is assumed that the behaviour of ideal rigid bodies towards orientation is independent of the material of the bodies and their changes of position, in the sense that if two intervals can once be brought into coincidence, they can always and everywhere be brought into coincidence. Both of these assumptions, which are of fundamental importance for geometry and especially for physical measurements, naturally arise from experience; in the theory of general relativity their validity needs to be assumed only for bodies and spaces of reference which are infinitely small compared to astronomical dimensions.

[1]This relation must hold for an arbitrary choice of the origin and of the direction (ratios ) of the interval.



The quantity we call the length of the interval. In order that this may be uniquely determined it is necessary to fix arbitrarily the length of a definite interval; for example, we can put it equal to 1 (unit of length). Then the lengths of all other intervals may be determined. If we make the linearly dependent upon a parameter ,

we obtain a line which has all the properties of the straight lines of the Euclidean geometry. In particular, it easily follows that by laying off times the interval upon a straight line, an interval of length is obtained. A length, therefore, means the result of a measurement carried out along a straight line by means of a unit measuring rod. It has a significance which is as independent of the system of co-ordinates as that of a straight line, as will appear in the sequel.

We come now to a train of thought which plays an analogous role in the theories of special and general relativity. We ask the question: besides the Cartesian co-ordinates which we have used are there other equivalent co-ordinates? An interval has a physical meaning which is independent of the choice of co-ordinates; and so has the spherical surface which we obtain as the locus of the end points of all equal intervals that we lay off from an arbitrary point of our space of reference. If as well as ( from 1 to 3) are Cartesian co-ordinates of our space of reference, then the spherical surface will be expressed in our two systems of co-ordinates by the equations

How must the be expressed in terms of the in order that equations (2) and (2a) may be equivalent to each other? Regarding the expressed as functions of the , we can write, by Taylor's theorem, for small values of the ,

If we substitute (2a) in this equation and compare with (1), we see that the must be linear functions of the . If we therefore put

then the equivalence of equations (2) and (2a) is expressed in the form

It therefore follows that must be a constant. If we put = 1, (2b) and (3a) furnish the conditions

in which = 1, or = 0, according = or ≠ . The conditions (4) are called the conditions of orthogonality, and the transformations (3), (4), linear orthogonal transformations. If we stipulate that shall be equal to the square of the length in every system of co-ordinates, and if we always measure with the same unit scale, then must be equal to 1. Therefore the linear orthogonal transformations are the only ones by means of which we can pass from one Cartesian system of co-ordinates in our space of reference to another. We see that in applying such transformations the equations of a straight line become equations of a straight line. Reversing equations (3a) by multiplying both sides by and summing for all the 's, we obtain

The same coefficients, , also determine the inverse substitution of . Geometrically, is the cosine of the angle between the axis and the axis.

To sum up, we can say that in the Euclidean geometry there are (in a given space of reference) preferred systems of co-ordinates, the Cartesian systems, which transform into each other by linear orthogonal transformations. The distance between two points of our space of reference, measured by a measuring rod, is expressed in such co-ordinates in a particularly simple manner. The whole of geometry may be founded upon this conception of distance. In the present treatment, geometry is related to actual things (rigid bodies), and its theorems are statements concerning the behaviour of these things, which may prove to be true or false.

One is ordinarily accustomed to study geometry divorced from any relation between its concepts and experience. There are advantages in isolating that which is purely logical and independent of what is, in principle, incomplete empiricism. This is satisfactory to the pure mathematician. He is satisfied if he can deduce his theorems from axioms correctly, that is, without errors of logic. The question as to whether Euclidean geometry is true or not does not concern him. But for our purpose it is necessary to associate the fundamental concepts of geometry with natural objects; without such an association geometry is worthless for the physicist. The physicist is concerned with the question as to whether the theorems of geometry are true or not. That Euclidean geometry, from this point of view, affirms something more than the mere deductions derived logically from definitions may be seen from the following simple consideration.

Between points of space there are distances, ; between these and the co-ordinates we have the relations



From these equations the co-ordinates may be eliminated, and from this elimination at least equations in the , will result.[2] Since the are measurable quantities, and by definition are independent of each other, these relations between the are not necessary a priori.

[2]In reality there are equations.



From the foregoing it is evident that the equations of transformation (3), (4) have a fundamental significance in Euclidean geometry, in that they govern the transformation from one Cartesian system of co-ordinates to another. The Cartesian systems of co-ordinates are characterized by the property that in them the measurable distance between two points, , is expressed by the equation



If and are two Cartesian systems of co-ordinates, then



The right-hand side is identically equal to the left-hand side on account of the equations of the linear orthogonal transformation, and the right-hand side differs from the left-hand side only in that the are replaced by the . This is expressed by the statement that is an invariant with respect to linear orthogonal transformations. It is evident that in the Euclidean geometry only such, and all such, quantities have an objective significance, independent of the particular choice of the Cartesian co-ordinates, as can be expressed by an invariant with respect to linear orthogonal transformations. This is the reason that the theory of invariants, which has to do with the laws that govern the form of invariants, is so important for analytical geometry.

As a second example of a geometrical invariant, consider a volume. This is expressed by

By means of Jacobi's theorem we may write

where the integrand in the last integral is the functional determinant of the with respect to the , and this by (3) is equal to the determinant of the coefficients of substitution, . If we form the determinant of the from equation (4), we obtain, by means of the theorem of multiplication of determinants,

If we limit ourselves to those transformations which have the determinant +1,[3] and only these arise from continuous variations of the systems of co-ordinates, then is an invariant.

[3]There are thus two kinds of Cartesian systems which are designated as "right-handed" and "left-handed" systems. The difference between these is familiar to every physicist and engineer. It is interesting to note that these two kinds of systems cannot be defined geometrically, but only the contrast between them.





Invariants, however, are not the only forms by means of which we can give expression to the independence of the particular choice of the Cartesian co-ordinates. Vectors and tensors are other forms of expression. Let us express the fact that the point with the current co-ordinates lies upon a straight line. We have

Without limiting the generality we can put



If we multiply the equations by (compare (3a) and (5)) and sum for all the 's, we get

where we have written



These are the equations of straight lines with respect to a second Cartesian system of co-ordinates '. They have the same form as the equations with respect to the original system of co-ordinates. It is therefore evident that straight lines have a significance which is independent of the system of co-ordinates. Formally, this depends upon the fact that the quantities () - are transformed as the components of an interval, . The ensemble of three quantities, defined for every system of Cartesian co-ordinates, and which transform as the components of an interval, is called a vector. If the three components of a vector vanish for one system of Cartesian co-ordinates, they vanish for all systems, because the equations of transformation are homogeneous. We can thus get the meaning of the concept of a vector without referring to a geometrical representation. This behaviour of the equations of a straight line can be expressed by saying that the equation of a straight line is co-variant with respect to linear orthogonal transformations.

We shall now show briefly that there are geometrical entities which lead to the concept of tensors. Let be the centre of a surface of the second degree, any point on the surface, and the projections of the interval upon the co-ordinate axes. Then the equation of the surface is

In this, and in analogous cases, we shall omit the sign of summation, and understand that the summation is to be carried out for those indices that appear twice. We thus write the equation of the surface

The quantities determine the surface completely, for a given position of the centre, with respect to the chosen system of Cartesian co-ordinates. From the known law of transformation for the (3a) for linear orthogonal transformations, we easily find the law of transformation for the :[4]



[4]The equation may, by (5), be replaced by = 1, from which the result stated immediately follows.





This transformation is homogeneous and of the first degree in the . On account of this transformation, the , are called components of a tensor of the second rank (the latter on account of the double index). If all the components, , of a tensor with respect to any system of Cartesian co-ordinates vanish, they vanish with respect to every other Cartesian system. The form and the position of the surface of the second degree is described by this tensor ().

Analytic tensors of higher rank (number of indices) may be defined. It is possible and advantageous to regard vectors as tensors of rank 1, and invariants (scalars) as tensors of rank 0. In this respect, the problem of the theory of invariants may be so formulated: according to what laws may new tensors be formed from given tensors? We shall consider these laws now, in order to be able to apply them later. We shall deal first only with the properties of tensors with respect to the transformation from one Cartesian system to another in the same space of reference, by means of linear orthogonal transformations. As the laws are wholly independent of the number of dimensions, we shall leave this number, , indefinite at first.





Definition. If a figure is defined with respect to every system of Cartesian co-ordinates in a space of reference of dimensions by the numbers ( = number of indices), then these numbers are the components of a tensor of rank if the transformation law is





Remark. From this definition it follows that

is an invariant, provided that (), (), () ... are vectors. Conversely, the tensor character of () may be inferred, if it is known that the expression (8) leads to an invariant for an arbitrary choice of the vectors (), (), etc.





Addition and Subtraction. By addition and subtraction of the corresponding components of tensors of the same rank, a tensor of equal rank results:

The proof follows from the definition of a tensor given above.





Multiplication. From a tensor of rank and a tensor of rank we may obtain a tensor of rank + by multiplying all the components of the first tensor by all the components of the second tensor:





Contraction. A tensor of rank - 2 may be obtained from one of rank by putting two definite indices equal to each other and then summing for this single index:





The proof is



In addition to these elementary rules of operation there is also the formation of tensors by differentiation ("erweiterung"):



New tensors, in respect to linear orthogonal transformations, may be formed from tensors according to these rules of operation.





Symmetrical Properties of Tensors. Tensors are called symmetrical or skew-symmetrical in respect to two of their indices, and , if both the components which result from interchanging the indices and are equal to each other or equal with opposite signs.





Theorem. The character of symmetry or skew-symmetry exists independently of the choice of co-ordinates, and in this lies its importance. The proof follows from the equation defining tensors.

Special Tensors.

I. The quantities (4) are tensor components (fundamental tensor).

Proof. If in the right-hand side of the equation of transformation = , we substitute for the quantities (which are equal to 1 or 0 according as = or ≠ ), we get

The justification for the last sign of equality becomes evident if one applies (4) to the inverse substitution (5).

II. There is a tensor () skew-symmetrical with respect to all pairs of indices, whose rank is equal to the number of dimensions, , and whose components are equal to +1 or -1 according as is an even or odd permutation of 1 2 3....

The proof follows with the aid of the theorem proved above

These few simple theorems form the apparatus from the theory of invariants for building the equations of pre-relativity physics and the theory of special relativity.

We have seen that in pre-relativity physics, in order to specify relations in space, a body of reference, or a space of reference, is required, and, in addition, a Cartesian system of co-ordinates. We can fuse both these concepts into a single one by thinking of a Cartesian system of co-ordinates as a cubical frame-work formed of rods each of unit length. The co-ordinates of the lattice points of this frame are integral numbers. It follows from the fundamental relation

that the members of such a space-lattice are all of unit length. To specify relations in time, we require in addition a standard clock placed at the origin of our Cartesian system of co-ordinates or frame of reference. If an event takes place anywhere we can assign to it three co-ordinates, , and a time , as soon as we have specified the time of the clock at the origin which is simultaneous with the event. We therefore give an objective significance to the statement of the simultaneity of distant events, while previously we have been concerned only with the simultaneity of two experiences of an individual. The time so specified is at all events independent of the position of the system of co-ordinates in our space of reference, and is therefore an invariant with respect to the transformation (3).

It is postulated that the system of equations expressing the laws of pre-relativity physics is co-variant with respect to the transformation (3), as are the relations of Euclidean geometry. The isotropy and homogeneity of space is expressed in this way.[5] We shall now consider some of the more important equations of physics from this point of view.

[5]The laws of physics could be expressed, even in case there were a unique direction in space, in such a way as to be co-variant with respect to the transformation (3); but such an expression would in this case be unsuitable. If there were a unique direction in space it would simplify the description of natural phenomena to orient the system of co-ordinates in a definite way in this direction. But if, on the other hand, there is no unique direction in space it is not logical to formulate the laws of nature in such a way as to conceal the equivalence of systems of co-ordinates that are oriented differently. We shall meet with this point of view again in the theories of special and general relativity.



The equations of motion of a material particle are

() is a vector; , and therefore also , an invariant; thus () is a vector; in the same way it may be shown that () is a vector. In general, the operation of differentiation with respect to time does not alter the tensor character. Since is an invariant (tensor of rank 0), ) is a vector, or tensor of rank 1 (by the theorem of the multiplication of tensors). If the force () has a vector character, the same holds for the difference (. These equations of motion are therefore valid in every other system of Cartesian co-ordinates in the space of reference. In the case where the forces are conservative we can easily recognize the vector character of (). For a potential energy, , exists, which depends only upon the mutual distances of the particles, and is therefore an invariant. The vector character of the force, = , is then a consequence of our general theorem about the derivative of a tensor of rank 0.

Multiplying by the velocity, a tensor of rank 1, we obtain the tensor equation

By contraction and multiplication by the scalar we obtain the equation of kinetic energy



If denotes the difference of the co-ordinates of the material particle and a point fixed in space, then the have the character of vectors. We evidently have = , so that the equations of motion of the particle may be written



Multiplying this equation by we obtain a tensor equation



Contracting the tensor on the left and taking the time average we obtain the virial theorem, which we shall not consider further. By interchanging the indices and subsequent subtraction, we obtain, after a simple transformation, the theorem of moments,



It is evident in this way that the moment of a vector is not a vector but a tensor. On account of their skew-symmetrical character there are not nine, but only three independent equations of this system. The possibility of replacing skew-symmetrical tensors of the second rank in space of three dimensions by vectors depends upon the formation of the vector



If we multiply the skew-symmetrical tensor of rank 2 by the special skew-symmetrical tensor introduced above, and contract twice, a vector results whose components are numerically equal to those of the tensor. These are the so-called axial vectors which transform differently, from a right-handed system to a left-handed system, from the . There is a gain in picturesqueness in regarding a skew-symmetrical tensor of rank 2 as a vector in space of three dimensions, but it does not represent the exact nature of the corresponding quantity so well as considering it a tensor.

We consider next the equations of motion of a continuous medium. Let be the density, the velocity components considered as functions of the co-ordinates and the time, the volume forces per unit of mass, and the stresses upon a surface perpendicular to the a-axis in the direction of increasing . Then the equations of motion are, by Newton's law,

in which is the acceleration of the particle which at time has the co-ordinates . If we express this acceleration by partial differential coefficients, we obtain, after dividing by ,



We must show that this equation holds independently of the special choice of the Cartesian system of co-ordinates. () is a vector, and therefore is also a vector. is a tensor of rank 2, is a tensor of rank 3. The second term on the left results from contraction in the indices , . The vector character of the second term on the right is obvious. In order that the first term on the right may also be a vector it is necessary for to be a tensor. Then by differentiation and contraction results, and is therefore a vector, as it also is after multiplication by the reciprocal scalar . That is a tensor, and therefore transforms according to the equation

is proved in mechanics by integrating this equation over an infinitely small tetrahedron. It is also proved there, by application of the theorem of moments to an infinitely small parallelopipedon, that , and hence that the tensor of the stress is a symmetrical tensor. From what has been said it follows that, with the aid of the rules given above, the equation is co-variant with respect to orthogonal transformations in space (rotational transformations); and the rules according to which the quantities in the equation must be transformed in order that the equation may be co-variant also become evident.

The co-variance of the equation of continuity,

requires, from the foregoing, no particular discussion.

We shall also test for co-variance the equations which express the dependence of the stress components upon the properties of the matter, and set up these equations for the case of a compressible viscous fluid with the aid of the conditions of co-variance. If we neglect the viscosity, the pressure, , will be a scalar, and will depend only upon the density and the temperature of the fluid. The contribution to the stress tensor is then evidently

in which is the special symmetrical tensor. This term will also be present in the case of a viscous fluid. But in this case there will also be pressure terms, which depend upon the space derivatives of the . We shall assume that this dependence is a linear one. Since these terms must be symmetrical tensors, the only ones which enter will be

(for is a scalar). For physical reasons (no slipping) it is assumed that for symmetrical dilatations in all directions, i.e. when

there are no frictional forces present, from which it follows that = . If only is different from zero, let , by which is determined. We then obtain for the complete stress tensor,



The heuristic value of the theory of invariants, which arises from the isotropy of space (equivalence of all directions), becomes evident from this example.

We consider, finally, Maxwell's equations in the form which are the foundation of the electron theory of Lorentz.



is a vector, because the current density is defined as the density of electricity multiplied by the vector velocity of the electricity. According to the first three equations it is evident that is also to be regarded as a vector. Then cannot be regarded as a vector.[6] The equations may, however, easily be interpreted if is regarded as a skew-symmetrical tensor of the second rank. In this sense, we write , , in place of , , respectively. Paying attention to the skew-symmetry of , the first three equations of (19) and (20) may be written in the form

In contrast to , appears as a quantity which has the same type of symmetry as an angular velocity. The divergence equations then take the form

The last equation is a skew-symmetrical tensor equation of the third rank (the skew-symmetry of the left-hand side with respect to every pair of indices may easily be proved, if attention is paid to the skew-symmetry of ). This notation is more natural than the usual one, because, in contrast to the latter, it is applicable to Cartesian left-handed systems as well as to right-handed systems without change of sign.

[6]These considerations will make the reader familiar with tensor operations without the special difficulties of the four-dimensional treatment; corresponding considerations in the theory of special relativity (Minkowski's interpretation of the field) will then offer fewer difficulties.





LECTURE II



THE THEORY OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY


THE previous considerations concerning the configuration of rigid bodies have been founded, irrespective of the assumption as to the validity of the Euclidean geometry, upon the hypothesis that all directions in space, or all configurations of Cartesian systems of co-ordinates, are physically equivalent. We may express this as the "principle of relativity with respect to direction," and it has been shown how equations (laws of nature) may be found, in accord with this principle, by the aid of the calculus of tensors. We now inquire whether there is a relativity with respect to the state of motion of the space of reference; in other words, whether there are spaces of reference in motion relatively to each other which are physically equivalent. From the standpoint of mechanics it appears that equivalent spaces of reference do exist. For experiments upon the earth tell us nothing of the fact that we are moving about the sun with a velocity of approximately 30 kilometres a second. On the other hand, this physical equivalence does not seem to hold for spaces of reference in arbitrary motion; for mechanical effects do not seem to be subject to the same laws in a jolting railway train as in one moving with uniform velocity; the rotation of the earth must be considered in writing down the equations of motion relatively to the earth. It appears, therefore, as if there were Cartesian systems of co-ordinates, the so-called inertial systems, with reference to which the laws of mechanics (more generally the laws of physics) are expressed in the simplest form. We may infer the validity of the following theorem: If is an inertial system, then every other system ' which moves uniformly and without rotation relatively to , is also an inertial system; the laws of nature are in concordance for all inertial systems. This statement we shall call the "principle of special relativity." We shall draw certain conclusions from this principle of "relativity of translation" just as we have already done for relativity of direction.

In order to be able to do this, we must first solve the following problem. If we are given the Cartesian co-ordinates, , and the time, , of an event relatively to one inertial system, , how can we calculate the co-ordinates, , and the time, ', of the same event relatively to an inertial system ' which moves with uniform translation relatively to ? In the pre-relativity physics this problem was solved by making unconsciously two hypotheses:—

1. The time is absolute; the time of an event, ', relatively to ' is the same as the time relatively to . If instantaneous signals could be sent to a distance, and if one knew that the state of motion of a clock had no influence on its rate, then this assumption would be physically established. For then clocks, similar to one another, and regulated alike, could be distributed over the systems and ', at rest relatively to them, and their indications would be independent of the state of motion of the systems; the time of an event would then be given by the clock in its immediate neighbourhood.

2. Length is absolute; if an interval, at rest relatively to , has a length , then it has the same length relatively to a system ' which is in motion relatively to .

If the axes of and ' are parallel to each other, a simple calculation based on these two assumptions, gives the equations of transformation



This transformation is known as the "Galilean Transformation." Differentiating twice by the time, we get

Further, it follows that for two simultaneous events,

The invariance of the distance between the two points results from squaring and adding. From this easily follows the co-variance of Newton's equations of motion with respect to the Galilean transformation (21). Hence it follows that classical mechanics is in accord with the principle of special relativity if the two hypotheses respecting scales and clocks are made.

But this attempt to found relativity of translation upon the Galilean transformation fails when applied to electromagnetic phenomena. The Maxwell-Lorentz electromagnetic equations are not co-variant with respect to the Galilean transformation. In particular, we note, by (21), that a ray of light which referred to has a velocity , has a different velocity referred to ', depending upon its direction. The space of reference of is therefore distinguished, with respect to its physical properties, from all spaces of reference which are in motion relatively to it (quiescent æther). But all experiments have shown that electromagnetic and optical phenomena, relatively to the earth as the body of reference, are not influenced by the translational velocity of the earth. The most important of these experiments are those of Michelson and Morley, which I shall assume are known. The validity of the principle of special relativity can therefore hardly be doubted.

On the other hand, the Maxwell-Lorentz equations have proved their validity in the treatment of optical problems in moving bodies. No other theory has satisfactorily explained the facts of aberration, the propagation of light in moving bodies (Fizeau), and phenomena observed in double stars (De Sitter). The consequence of the Maxwell-Lorentz equations that in a vacuum light is propagated with the velocity , at least with respect to a definite inertial system , must therefore be regarded as proved. According to the principle of special relativity, we must also assume the truth of this principle for every other inertial system.

Before we draw any conclusions from these two principles we must first review the physical significance of the concepts "time" and "velocity." It follows from what has gone before, that co-ordinates with respect to an inertial system are physically defined by means of measurements and constructions with the aid of rigid bodies. In order to measure time, we have supposed a clock, , present somewhere, at rest relatively to . But we cannot fix the time, by means of this clock, of an event whose distance from the clock is not negligible; for there are no "instantaneous signals" that we can use in order to compare the time of the event with that of the clock. In order to complete the definition of time we may employ the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light in a vacuum. Let us suppose that we place similar clocks at points of the system , at rest relatively to it, and regulated according to the following scheme. A ray of light is sent out from one of the clocks, , at the instant when it indicates the time , and travels through a vacuum a distance , to the clock ; at the instant when this ray meets the clock the latter is set to indicate the time = + .[7] The principle of the constancy of the velocity of light then states that this adjustment of the clocks will not lead to contradictions. With clocks so adjusted, we can assign the time to events which take place near any one of them. It is essential to note that this definition of time relates only to the inertial system , since we have used a system of clocks at rest relatively to . The assumption which was made in the pre-relativity physics of the absolute character of time (i.e. the independence of time of the choice of the inertial system) does not follow at all from this definition.

[7]Strictly speaking, it would be more correct to define simultaneity first, somewhat as follows: two events taking place at the points and of the system are simultaneous if they appear at the same instant when observed from the middle point, , of the interval . Time is then defined as the ensemble of the indications of similar clocks, at rest relatively to , which register the same simultaneously.



The theory of relativity is often criticized for giving, without justification, a central theoretical role to the propagation of light, in that it founds the concept of time upon the law of propagation of light. The situation, however, is somewhat as follows. In order to give physical significance to the concept of time, processes of some kind are required which enable relations to be established between different places. It is immaterial what kind of processes one chooses for such a definition of time. It is advantageous, however, for the theory, to choose only those processes concerning which we know something certain. This holds for the propagation of light in vacuo in a higher degree than for any other process which could be considered, thanks to the investigations of Maxwell and H. A. Lorentz.

From all of these considerations, space and time data have a physically real, and not a mere fictitious, significance; in particular this holds for all the relations in which co-ordinates and time enter, e.g. the relations (21). There is, therefore, sense in asking whether those equations are true or not, as well as in asking what the true equations of transformation are by which we pass from one inertial system to another, ', moving relatively to it. It may be shown that this is uniquely settled by means of the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light and the principle of special relativity.

To this end we think of space and time physically defined with respect to two inertial systems, and ', in the way that has been shown. Further, let a ray of light pass from one point to another point of through a vacuum. If is the measured distance between the two points, then the propagation of light must satisfy the equation



If we square this equation, and express by the differences of the co-ordinates, , in place of this equation we can write

This equation formulates the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light relatively to . It must hold whatever may be the motion of the source which emits the ray of light.

The same propagation of light may also be considered relatively to ', in which case also the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light must be satisfied. Therefore, with respect to ', we have the equation



Equations (22a) and (22) must be mutually consistent with each other with respect to the transformation which transforms from to '. A transformation which effects this we shall call a "Lorentz transformation."

Before considering these transformations in detail we shall make a few general remarks about space and time. In the pre-relativity physics space and time were separate entities. Specifications of time were independent of the choice of the space of reference. The Newtonian mechanics was relative with respect to the space of reference, so that, e.g. the statement that two non-simultaneous events happened at the same place had no objective meaning (that is, independent of the space of reference). But this relativity had no role in building up the theory. One spoke of points of space, as of instants of time, as if they were absolute realities. It was not observed that the true element of the space-time specification was the event, specified by the four numbers , , , . The conception of something happening was always that of a four-dimensional continuum; but the recognition of this was obscured by the absolute character of the pre-relativity time. Upon giving up the hypothesis of the absolute character of time, particularly that of simultaneity, the four-dimensionality of the time-space concept was immediately recognized. It is neither the point in space, nor the instant in time, at which something happens that has physical reality, but only the event itself. There is no absolute (independent of the space of reference) relation in space, and no absolute relation in time between two events, but there is an absolute (independent of the space of reference) relation in space and time, as will appear in the sequel. The circumstance that there is no objective rational division of the four-dimensional continuum into a three-dimensional space and a one-dimensional time continuum indicates that the laws of nature will assume a form which is logically most satisfactory when expressed as laws in the four-dimensional space-time continuum. Upon this depends the great advance in method which the theory of relativity owes to Minkowski. Considered from this standpoint, we must regard , , , as the four co-ordinates of an event in the four-dimensional continuum. We have far less success in picturing to ourselves relations in this four-dimensional continuum than in the three-dimensional Euclidean continuum; but it must be emphasized that even in the Euclidean three-dimensional geometry its concepts and relations are only of an abstract nature in our minds, and are not at all identical with the images we form visually and through our sense of touch. The non-divisibility of the four-dimensional continuum of events does not at all, however, involve the equivalence of the space co-ordinates with the time co-ordinate. On the contrary, we must remember that the time co-ordinate is defined physically wholly differently from the space co-ordinates. The relations (22) and (22a) which when equated define the Lorentz transformation show, further, a difference in the role of the time co-ordinate from that of the space co-ordinates; for the term has the opposite sign to the space terms, , , .

Before we analyse further the conditions which define the Lorentz transformation, we shall introduce the light-time, , in place of the time, , in order that the constant shall not enter explicitly into the formulas to be developed later. Then the Lorentz transformation is defined in such a way that, first, it makes the equation

a co-variant equation, that is, an equation which is satisfied with respect to every inertial system if it is satisfied in the inertial system to which we refer the two given events (emission and reception of the ray of light). Finally, with Minkowski, we introduce in place of the real time co-ordinate , the imaginary time co-ordinate

Then the equation defining the propagation of light, which must be co-variant with respect to the Lorentz transformation, becomes

This condition is always satisfied[8] if we satisfy the more general condition that

shall be an invariant with respect to the transformation. This condition is satisfied only by linear transformations, that is, transformations of the type

in which the summation over the is to be extended from = 1 to = 4. A glance at equations (23) and (24) shows that the Lorentz transformation so defined is identical with the translational and rotational transformations of the Euclidean geometry, if we disregard the number of dimensions and the relations of reality. We can also conclude that the coefficients must satisfy the conditions

Since the ratios of the are real, it follows that all the and the are real, except , , , , , and , which are purely imaginary.

[8]That this specialization lies in the nature of the case will be evident later.





Special Lorentz Transformation. We obtain the simplest transformations of the type of (24) and (25) if only two of the co-ordinates are to be transformed, and if all the , which determine the new origin, vanish. We obtain then for the indices 1 and 2, on account of the three independent conditions which the relations (25) furnish,



This is a simple rotation in space of the (space) co-ordinate system about -axis. We see that the rotational transformation in space (without the time transformation) which we studied before is contained in the Lorentz transformation as a special case. For the indices 1 and 4 we obtain, in an analogous manner,



On account of the relations of reality must be taken as imaginary. To interpret these equations physically, we introduce the real light-time and the velocity of ' relatively to , instead of the imaginary angle . We have, first,

Since for the origin of ' i.e., for = 0, we must have , it follows from the first of these equations that

and also

so that we obtain



These equations form the well-known special Lorentz transformation, which in the general theory represents a rotation, through an imaginary angle, of the four-dimensional system of co-ordinates. If we introduce the ordinary time , in place of the light-time , then in (29) we must replace by and by .

We must now fill in a gap. From the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light it follows that the equation

has a significance which is independent of the choice of the inertial system; but the invariance of the quantity does not at all follow from this. This quantity might be transformed with a factor. This depends upon the fact that the right-hand side of (29) might be multiplied by a factor , independent of . But the principle of relativity does not permit this factor to be different from 1, as we shall now show. Let us assume that we have a rigid circular cylinder moving in the direction of its axis. If its radius, measured at rest with a unit measuring rod is equal to , its radius in motion, might be different from , since the theory of relativity does not make the assumption that the shape of bodies with respect to a space of reference is independent of their motion relatively to this space of reference. But all directions in space must be equivalent to each other. may therefore depend upon the magnitude of the velocity, but not upon its direction; must therefore be an even function of . If the cylinder is at rest relatively to ' the equation of its lateral surface is

If we write the last two equations of (29) more generally

then the lateral surface of the cylinder referred to satisfies the equation

The factor therefore measures the lateral contraction of the cylinder, and can thus, from the above, be only an even function of .

If we introduce a third system of co-ordinates, ", which moves relatively to ' with velocity in the direction of the negative -axis of , we obtain, by applying (29) twice,

Now, since must be equal to and since we assume that we use the same measuring rods in all the systems, it follows that the transformation of " to must be the identical transformation (since the possibility does not need to be considered). It is essential for these considerations to assume that the behaviour of the measuring rods does not depend upon the history of their previous motion.





Moving Measuring Rods and Clocks. At the definite -time, , the position of the points given by the integers , is with respect to , given by ; this follows from the first of equations (29) and expresses the Lorentz contraction. A clock at rest at the origin of , whose beats are characterized by , will, when observed from ', have beats characterized by

this follows from the second of equations (29) and shows that the clock goes slower than if it were at rest relatively to '. These two consequences, which hold, mutatis mutandis, for every system of reference, form the physical content, free from convention, of the Lorentz transformation.





Addition Theorem for Velocities. If we combine two special Lorentz transformations with the relative velocities and , then the velocity of the single Lorentz transformation which takes the place of the two separate ones is, according to (27), given by





General Statements about the Lorentz Transformation and its Theory of Invariants. The whole theory of invariants of the special theory of relativity depends upon the invariant (23). Formally, it has the same rôle in the four-dimensional space-time continuum as the invariant + + in the Euclidean geometry and in the pre-relativity physics. The latter quantity is not an invariant with respect to all the Lorentz transformations; the quantity of equation (23) assumes the rôle of this invariant. With respect to an arbitrary inertial system, may be determined by measurements; with a given unit of measure it is a completely determinate quantity, associated with an arbitrary pair of events.

The invariant differs, disregarding the number of dimensions, from the corresponding invariant of the Euclidean geometry in the following points. In the Euclidean geometry is necessarily positive; it vanishes only when the two points concerned come together. On the other hand, from the vanishing of

it cannot be concluded that the two space-time points fall together; the vanishing of this quantity , is the invariant condition that the two space-time points can be connected by a light signal in vacuo. If a point (event) represented in the four-dimensional space of the , , , then all the "points" which can be connected to by means of a light signal lie upon the cone = 0 (compare Fig. 1, in which the dimension is suppressed). The "upper" half of the cone may contain the "points" to which light signals can be sent from ; then the "lower" half of the cone will contain the "points" from which light signals can be sent to . The points enclosed by the conical surface furnish, with , a negative ; as well as is then, according to Minkowski, of the nature of a time. Such intervals represent elements of possible paths of motion, the velocity being less than that of light.[9] In this case the -axis may be drawn in the direction of by suitably choosing the state of motion of the inertial system. If lies outside of the "light-cone" then is of the nature of a space; in this case, by properly choosing the inertial system, can be made to vanish.





FIG. 1.





[9]That material velocities exceeding that of light are not possible, follows from the appearance of the radical in the special Lorentz transformation (29).



By the introduction of the imaginary time variable, , Minkowski has made the theory of invariants for the four-dimensional continuum of physical phenomena fully analogous to the theory of invariants for the three-dimensional continuum of Euclidean space. The theory of four-dimensional tensors of special relativity differs from the theory of tensors in three-dimensional space, therefore, only in the number of dimensions and the relations of reality.

A physical entity which is specified by four quantities, , in an arbitrary inertial system of the , , , , is called a 4-vector, with the components , if the correspond in their relations of reality and the properties of transformation to the ; it may be of the nature of a space or of a time. The sixteen quantities , then form the components of a tensor of the second rank, if they transform according to the scheme

It follows from this that the behave, with respect to their properties of transformation and their properties of reality, as the products of components, of two 4-vectors, () and (). All the components are real except those which contain the index 4 once, those being purely imaginary. Tensors of the third and higher ranks may be defined in an analogous way. The operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, contraction and differentiation for these tensors are wholly analogous to the corresponding operations for tensors in three-dimensional space.

Before we apply the tensor theory to the four-dimensional space-time continuum, we shall examine more particularly the skew-symmetrical tensors. The tensor of the second rank has, in general, 16 = 4·4 components. In the case of skew-symmetry the components with two equal indices vanish, and the components with unequal indices are equal and opposite in pairs. There exist, therefore, only six independent components, as is the case in the electromagnetic field. In fact, it will be shown when we consider Maxwell's equations that these may be looked upon as tensor equations, provided we regard the electromagnetic field as a skew-symmetrical tensor. Further, it is clear that the skew-symmetrical tensor of the third rank (skew-symmetrical in all pairs of indices) has only four independent components, since there are only four combinations of three different indices.

We now turn to Maxwell's equations (19a), (19b), (20a), (20b), and introduce the notation:[10]

with the convention that shall be equal to . Then Maxwell's equations may be combined into the forms

as one can easily verify by substituting from (30a) and (31). Equations (32) and (33) have a tensor character, and are therefore co-variant with respect to Lorentz transformations, if the and the have a tensor character, which we assume. Consequently, the laws for transforming these quantities from one to another allowable (inertial) system of co-ordinates are uniquely determined. The progress in method which electrodynamics owes to the theory of special relativity lies principally in this, that the number of independent hypotheses is diminished. If we consider, for example, equations (19a) only from the standpoint of relativity of direction, as we have done above, we see that they have three logically independent terms. The way in which the electric intensity enters these equations appears to be wholly independent of the way in which the magnetic intensity enters them; it would not be surprising if instead of , we had, say, or if this term were absent. On the other hand, only two independent terms appear in equation (32). The electromagnetic field appears as a formal unit; the way in which the electric field enters this equation is determined by the way in which the magnetic field enters it. Besides the electromagnetic field, only the electric current density appears as an independent entity. This advance in method arises from the fact that the electric and magnetic fields draw their separate existences from the relativity of motion. A field which appears to be purely an electric field, judged from one system, has also magnetic field components when judged from another inertial system. When applied to an electromagnetic field, the general law of transformation furnishes, for the special case of the special Lorentz transformation, the equations



[10]In order to avoid confusion from now on we shall use the three-dimensional space indices, , , instead of 1, 2, 3, and we shall reserve the numeral indices 1, 2, 3, 4 for the four-dimensional space-time continuum.



If there exists with respect to only a magnetic field, , but no electric field, , then with respect to ' there exists an electric field as well, which would act upon an electric particle at rest relatively to '. An observer at rest relatively to would designate this force as the Biot-Savart force, or the Lorentz electromotive force. It therefore appears as if this electromotive force had become fused with the electric field intensity into a single entity.

In order to view this relation formally, let us consider the expression for the force acting upon unit volume of electricity,

in which is the vector velocity of electricity, with the velocity of light as the unit. If we introduce and according to (30a) and (31), we obtain for the first component the expression

Observing that vanishes on account of the skew-symmetry of the tensor (), the components of are given by the first three components of the four-dimensional vector

and the fourth component is given by

There is, therefore, a four-dimensional vector of force per unit volume, whose first three components, , , , are the ponderomotive force components per unit volume, and whose fourth component is the rate of working of the field per unit volume, multiplied by .

A comparison of (36) and (35) shows that the theory of relativity formally unites the ponderomotive force of the electric field, , and the Biot-Savart or Lorentz force [, ].





Mass and Energy. An important conclusion can be drawn from the existence and significance of the 4-vector . Let us imagine a body upon which the electromagnetic field acts for a time. In the symbolic figure (Fig. 2) designates the -axis, and is at the same time a substitute for the three space axes , , ; designates the real time axis. In this diagram a body of finite extent is represented, at a definite time , by the interval the whole space-time existence of the body is represented by a strip whose boundary is everywhere inclined less than 45° to the -axis. Between the time sections, = and = , but not extending to them, a portion of the strip is shaded. This represents the portion of the space-time manifold in which the electromagnetic field acts upon the body, or upon the electric charges contained in it, the action upon them being transmitted to the body. We shall now consider the changes which take place in the momentum and energy of the body as a result of this action.



FIG. 2.





We shall assume that the principles of momentum and energy are valid for the body. The change in momentum, , , , and the change in energy, are then given by the expressions

Since the four-dimensional element of volume is an invariant, and (, , , ) forms a 4-vector, the four-dimensional integral extended over the shaded portion transforms as a 4-vector, as does also the integral between the limits and , because the portion of the region which is not shaded contributes nothing to the integral. It follows, therefore, that , , , form a 4-vector. Since the quantities themselves transform in the same way as their increments, it follows that the aggregate of the four quantities

has itself the properties of a vector; these quantities are referred to an instantaneous condition of the body (e.g. at the time = ).

This 4-vector may also be expressed in terms of the mass , and the velocity of the body, considered as a material particle. To form this expression, we note first, that

is an invariant which refers to an infinitely short portion of the four-dimensional line which represents the motion of the material particle. The physical significance of the invariant may easily be given. If the time axis is chosen in such a way that it has the direction of the line differential which we are considering, or, in other words, if we reduce the material particle to rest, we shall then have ; this will therefore be measured by the light-seconds clock which is at the same place, and at rest relatively to the material particle. We therefore call the proper time of the material particle. As opposed to , is therefore an invariant, and is practically equivalent to for motions whose velocity is small compared to that of light. Hence we see that

has, just as the , the character of a vector; we shall designate () as the four-dimensional vector (in brief, 4-vector) of velocity. Its components satisfy, by (38), the condition

We see that this 4-vector, whose components in the ordinary notation are

is the only 4-vector which can be formed from the velocity components of the material particle which are defined in three dimensions by

We therefore see that

must be that 4-vector which is to be equated to the 4-vector of momentum and energy whose existence we have proved above. By equating the components, we obtain, in three-dimensional notation,



We recognize, in fact, that these components of momentum agree with those of classical mechanics for velocities which are small compared to that of light. For large velocities the momentum increases more rapidly than linearly with the velocity, so as to become infinite on approaching the velocity of light.

If we apply the last of equations (43) to a material particle at rest ( = 0), we see that the energy, of a, body at rest is equal to its mass. Had we chosen the second as our unit of time, we would have obtained

Mass and energy are therefore essentially alike; they are only different expressions for the same thing. The mass of a body is not a constant; it varies with changes in its energy.[11] We see from the last of equations (43) that becomes infinite when approaches 1, the velocity of light. If we develop in powers of , we obtain,

The second term of this expansion corresponds to the kinetic energy of the material particle in classical mechanics.

[11]The emission of energy in radioactive processes is evidently connected with the fact that the atomic weights are not integers. Attempts have been made to draw conclusions from this concerning the structure and stability of the atomic nuclei.





Equations of Motion of Material Particles. From (43) we obtain, by differentiating by the time , and using the principle of momentum, in the notation of three-dimensional vectors,



This equation, which was previously employed by H. A. Lorentz for the motion of electrons, has been proved to be true, with great accuracy, by experiments with -rays.





Energy Tensor of the Electromagnetic Field. Before the development of the theory of relativity it was known that the principles of energy and momentum could be expressed in a differential form for the electromagnetic field. The four-dimensional formulation of these principles leads to an important conception, that of the energy tensor, which is important for the further development of the theory of relativity.

If in the expression for the 4-vector of force per unit volume,

using the field equations (32), we express in terms of the field intensities, , we obtain, after some transformations and repeated application of the field equations (32) and (33), the expression

where we have written[12]



[12]To be summed for the indices and .



The physical meaning of equation (47) becomes evident if in place of this equation we write, using a new notation,

or, on eliminating the imaginary,



When expressed in the latter form, we see that the first three equations state the principle of momentum; ,..., are the Maxwell stresses in the electromagnetic field, and (, , ) is the vector momentum per unit volume of the field. The last of equations (47b) expresses the energy principle; is the vector flow of energy, and the energy per unit volume of the field. In fact, we get from (48) by introducing the well-known expressions for the components of the field intensity from electrodynamics,

We conclude from (48) that the energy tensor of the electromagnetic field is symmetrical; with this is connected the fact that the momentum per unit volume and the how of energy are equal to each other (relation between energy and inertia).

We therefore conclude from these considerations that the energy per unit volume has the character of a tensor. This has been proved directly only for an electromagnetic field, although we may claim universal validity for it. Maxwell's equations determine the electromagnetic field when the distribution of electric charges and currents is known. But we do not know the laws which govern the currents and charges. We do know, indeed, that electricity consists of elementary particles (electrons, positive nuclei), but from a theoretical point of view we cannot comprehend this. We do not know the energy factors which determine the distribution of electricity in particles of definite size and charge, and all attempts to complete the theory in this direction have failed. If then we can build upon Maxwell's equations in general, the energy tensor of the electromagnetic field is known only outside the charged particles.[13] In these regions, outside of charged particles, the only regions in which we can believe that we have the complete expression for the energy tensor, we have, by (47),



[13]It has been attempted to remedy this lack of knowledge by considering the charged particles as proper singularities. But in my opinion this means giving up a real understanding of the structure of matter. It seems to me much better to give in to our present inability rather than to be satisfied by a solution that is only apparent.





General Expressions for the Conservation Principles. We can hardly avoid making the assumption that in all other cases, also, the space distribution of energy is given by a symmetrical tensor, , and that this complete energy tensor everywhere satisfies the relation (47c). At any rate we shall see that by means of this assumption we obtain the correct expression for the integral energy principle.

Let us consider a spatially bounded, closed system, which, four-dimensionally, we may represent as a strip, outside of which the vanish. Integrate equation (47c) over a space section. Since the integrals of , and vanish because the vanish at the limits of integration, we obtain

Inside the parentheses are the expressions for the momentum of the whole system, multiplied by , together with the negative energy of the system, so that (49) expresses the conservation principles in their integral form. That this gives the right conception of energy and the conservation principles will be seen from the following considerations.





PHENOMENOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE ENERGY TENSOR OF MATTER.

Hydrodynamical Equations. We know that matter is built up of electrically charged particles, but we do not know the laws which govern the constitution of these particles. In treating mechanical problems, we are therefore obliged to make use of an inexact description of matter, which corresponds to that of classical mechanics. The density , of a material substance and the hydrodynamical pressures are the fundamental concepts upon which such a description is based.



FIG. 3.





Let be the density of matter at a place, estimated with reference to a system of co-ordinates moving with the matter. Then , the density at rest, is an invariant. If we think of the matter in arbitrary motion and neglect the pressures (particles of dust in vacuo, neglecting the size of the particles and the temperature), then the energy tensor will depend only upon the velocity components, and . We secure the tensor character of by putting

in which the , in the three-dimensional representation, are given by (41). In fact, it follows from (50) that for , (equal to the negative energy per unit volume), as it should, according to the theorem of the equivalence of mass and energy, and according to the physical interpretation of the energy tensor given above. If an external force (four-dimensional vector, ) acts upon the matter, by the principles of momentum and energy the equation

must hold. We shall now show that this equation leads to the same law of motion of a material particle as that already obtained. Let us imagine the matter to be of infinitely small extent in space, that is, a four-dimensional thread; then by integration over the whole thread with respect to the space co-ordinates , , , we obtain



Now is an invariant, as is, therefore, also . We shall calculate this integral, first with respect to the inertial system which we have chosen, and second, with respect to a system relatively to which the matter has the velocity zero. The integration is to be extended over a filament of the thread for which may be regarded as constant over the whole section. If the space volumes of the filament referred to the two systems are and respectively, then we have

and therefore also



If we substitute the right-hand side for the left-hand side in the former integral, and put outside the sign of integration, we obtain,

We see, therefore, that the generalized conception of the energy tensor is in agreement with our former result.





The Eulerian Equations for Perfect Fluids. In order to get nearer to the behaviour of real matter we must add to the energy tensor a term which corresponds to the pressures. The simplest case is that of a perfect fluid in which the pressure is determined by a scalar . Since the tangential stresses , etc., vanish in this case, the contribution to the energy tensor must be of the form . We must therefore put

At rest, the density of the matter, or the energy per unit volume, is in this case, not but . For

In the absence of any force, we have

If we multiply this equation by and sum for the 's we obtain, using (40),

where we have put . This is the equation of continuity, which differs from that of classical mechanics by the term , which, practically, is vanishingly small. Observing (52), the conservation principles take the form

The equations for the first three indices evidently correspond to the Eulerian equations. That the equations (52) and (53) correspond, to a first approximation, to the hydrodynamical equations of classical mechanics, is a further confirmation of the generalized energy principle. The density of matter and of energy has the character of a symmetrical tensor.





LECTURE III



THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY


ALL of the previous considerations have been based upon the assumption that all inertial systems are equivalent for the description of physical phenomena, but that they are preferred, for the formulation of the laws of nature, to spaces of reference in a different state of motion. We can think of no cause for this preference for definite states of motion to all others, according to our previous considerations, either in the perceptible bodies or in the concept of motion; on the contrary, it must be regarded as an independent property of the space-time continuum. The principle of inertia, in particular, seems to compel us to ascribe physically objective properties to the space-time continuum. Just as it was necessary from the Newtonian standpoint to make both the statements, tempus est absolutum, spatium est absolutum, so from the standpoint of the special theory of relativity we must say, continuum spatii et temporis est absolutum. In this latter statement absolutum means not only "physically real," but also "independent in its physical properties, having a physical effect, but not itself influenced by physical conditions."

As long as the principle of inertia is regarded as the keystone of physics, this standpoint is certainly the only one which is justified. But there are two serious criticisms of the ordinary conception. In the first place, it is contrary to the mode of thinking in science to conceive of a thing (the space-time continuum) which acts itself, but which cannot be acted upon. This is the reason why E. Mach was led to make the attempt to eliminate space as an active cause in the system of mechanics. According to him, a material particle does not move in unaccelerated motion relatively to space, but relatively to the centre of all the other masses in the universe; in this way the series of causes of mechanical phenomena was closed, in contrast to the mechanics of Newton and Galileo. In order to develop this idea within the limits of the modern theory of action through a medium, the properties of the space-time continuum which determine inertia must be regarded as field properties of space, analogous to the electromagnetic field. The concepts of classical mechanics afford no way of expressing this. For this reason Mach's attempt at a solution failed for the time being. We shall come back to this point of view later. In the second place, classical mechanics indicates a limitation which directly demands an extension of the principle of relativity to spaces of reference which are not in uniform motion relatively to each other. The ratio of the masses of two bodies is defined in mechanics in two ways which differ from each other fundamentally; in the first place, as the reciprocal ratio of the accelerations which the same motional force imparts to them (inert mass), and in the second place, as the ratio of the forces which act upon them in the same gravitational field (gravitational mass). The equality of these two masses, so differently defined, is a fact which is confirmed by experiments of very high accuracy (experiments of Eötvös), and classical mechanics offers no explanation for this equality. It is, however, clear that science is fully justified in assigning such a numerical equality only after this numerical equality is reduced to an equality of the real nature of the two concepts.

That this object may actually be attained by an extension of the principle of relativity, follows from the following consideration. A little reflection will show that the theorem of the equality of the inert and the gravitational mass is equivalent to the theorem that the acceleration imparted to a body by a gravitational field is independent of the nature of the body. For Newton's equation of motion in a gravitational field, written out in full, is

It is only when there is numerical equality between the inert and gravitational mass that the acceleration is independent of the nature of the body. Let now be an inertial system. Masses which are sufficiently far from each other and from other bodies are then, with respect to , free from acceleration. We shall also refer these masses to a system of co-ordinates ' uniformly accelerated with respect to . Relatively to ' all the masses have equal and parallel accelerations; with respect to ' they behave just as if a gravitational field were present and ' were unaccelerated. Overlooking for the present the question as to the "cause" of such a gravitational field, which will occupy us later, there is nothing to prevent our conceiving this gravitational field as real, that is, the conception that ' is "at rest" and a gravitational field is present we may consider as equivalent to the conception that only is an "allowable" system of co-ordinates and no gravitational field is present. The assumption of the complete physical equivalence of the systems of co-ordinates, and ', we call the "principle of equivalence;" this principle is evidently intimately connected with the theorem of the equality between the inert and the gravitational mass, and signifies an extension of the principle of relativity to co-ordinate systems which are in non-uniform motion relatively to each other. In fact, through this conception we arrive at the unity of the nature of inertia and gravitation. For according to our way of looking at it, the same masses may appear to be either under the action of inertia alone (with respect to ) or under the combined action of inertia and gravitation (with respect to '). The possibility of explaining the numerical equality of inertia and gravitation by the unity of their nature gives to the general theory of relativity, according to my conviction, such a superiority over the conceptions of classical mechanics, that all the difficulties encountered in development must be considered as small in comparison.

What justifies us in dispensing with the preference for inertial systems over all other co-ordinate systems, a preference that seems so securely established by experiment based upon the principle of inertia? The weakness of the principle of inertia lies in this, that it involves an argument in a circle: a mass moves without acceleration if it is sufficiently far from other bodies; we know that it is sufficiently far from other bodies only by the fact that it moves without acceleration. Are there, in general, any inertial systems for very extended portions of the space-time continuum, or, indeed, for the whole universe? We may look upon the principle of inertia as established, to a high degree of approximation, for the space of our planetary system, provided that we neglect the perturbations due to the sun and planets. Stated more exactly, there are finite regions, where, with respect to a suitably chosen space of reference, material particles move freely without acceleration, and in which the laws of the special theory of relativity, which have been developed above, hold with remarkable accuracy. Such regions we shall call "Galilean regions." We shall proceed from the consideration of such regions as a special case of known properties.

The principle of equivalence demands that in dealing with Galilean regions we may equally well make use of non-inertial systems, that is, such co-ordinate systems as, relatively to inertial systems, are not free from acceleration and rotation. If, further, we are going to do away completely with the difficult question as to the objective reason for the preference of certain systems of co-ordinates, then we must allow the use of arbitrarily moving systems of co-ordinates. As soon as we make this attempt seriously we come into conflict with that physical interpretation of space and time to which we were led by the special theory of relativity. For let ' be a system of co-ordinates whose '-axis coincides with the -axis of , and which rotates about the latter axis with constant angular velocity. Are the configurations of rigid bodies, at rest relatively to ', in accordance with the laws of Euclidean geometry? Since ' is not an inertial system, we do not know directly the laws of configuration of rigid bodies with respect to ', nor the laws of nature, in general. But we do know these laws with respect to the inertial system , and we can therefore estimate them with respect to '. Imagine a circle drawn about the origin in the plane of ' and a diameter of this circle. Imagine, further, that we have given a large number of rigid rods, all equal to each other. We suppose these laid in series along the periphery and the diameter of the circle, at rest relatively to '. If is the number of these rods along the periphery, the number along the diameter, then, if ' does not rotate relatively to , we shall have

But if ' rotates we get a different result. Suppose that at a definite time of we determine the ends of all the rods. With respect to all the rods upon the periphery experience the Lorentz contraction, but the rods upon the diameter do not experience this contraction (along their lengths!).[14] It therefore follows that



It therefore follows that the laws of configuration of rigid bodies with respect to ' do not agree with the laws of configuration of rigid bodies that are in accordance with Euclidean geometry. If, further, we place two similar clocks (rotating with '), one upon the periphery, and the other at the centre of the circle, then, judged from , the clock on the periphery will go slower than the clock at the centre. The same thing must take place, judged from ', if we define time with respect to ' in a not wholly unnatural way, that is, in such a way that the laws with respect to ' depend explicitly upon the time. Space and time, therefore, cannot be defined with respect to ' as they were in the special theory of relativity with respect to inertial systems. But, according to the principle of equivalence, ' is also to be considered as a system at rest, with respect to which there is a gravitational field (field of centrifugal force, and force of Coriolis). We therefore arrive at the result: the gravitational field influences and even determines the metrical laws of the space-time continuum. If the laws of configuration of ideal rigid bodies are to be expressed geometrically, then in the presence of a gravitational field the geometry is not Euclidean.

[14]These considerations assume that the behaviour of rods and clocks depends only upon velocities, and not upon accelerations, or, at least, that the influence of acceleration does not counteract that of velocity.





The case that we have been considering is analogous to that which is presented in the two-dimensional treatment of surfaces. It is impossible in the latter case also, to introduce co-ordinates on a surface (e.g. the surface of an ellipsoid) which have a simple metrical significance, while on a plane the Cartesian co-ordinates, , , signify directly lengths measured by a unit measuring rod. Gauss overcame this difficulty, in his theory of surfaces, by introducing curvilinear co-ordinates which, apart from satisfying conditions of continuity, were wholly arbitrary, and afterwards these co-ordinates were related to the metrical properties of the surface. In an analogous way we shall introduce in the general theory of relativity arbitrary co-ordinates, , , , , which shall number uniquely the space-time points, so that neighbouring events are associated with neighbouring values of the co-ordinates; otherwise, the choice of co-ordinates is arbitrary. We shall be true to the principle of relativity in its broadest sense if we give such a form to the laws that they are valid in every such four-dimensional system of co-ordinates, that is, if the equations expressing the laws are co-variant with respect to arbitrary transformations.

The most important point of contact between Gauss's theory of surfaces and the general theory of relativity lies in the metrical properties upon which the concepts of both theories, in the main, are based. In the case of the theory of surfaces, Gauss's argument is as follows. Plane geometry may be based upon the concept of the distance , between two indefinitely near points. The concept of this distance is physically significant because the distance can be measured directly by means of a rigid measuring rod. By a suitable choice of Cartesian co-ordinates this distance may be expressed by the formula . We may base upon this quantity the concepts of the straight line as the geodesic (), the interval, the circle, and the angle, upon which the Euclidean plane geometry is built. A geometry may be developed upon another continuously curved surface, if we observe that an infinitesimally small portion of the surface may be regarded as plane, to within relatively infinitesimal quantities. There are Cartesian co-ordinates, , , upon such a small portion of the surface, and the distance between two points, measured by a measuring rod, is given by

If we introduce arbitrary curvilinear co-ordinates, , , on the surface, then , , may be expressed linearly in terms of , . Then everywhere upon the surface we have

where , , are determined by the nature of the surface and the choice of co-ordinates; if these quantities are known, then it is also known how networks of rigid rods may be laid upon the surface. In other words, the geometry of surfaces may be based upon this expression for exactly as plane geometry is based upon the corresponding expression.

There are analogous relations in the four-dimensional space-time continuum of physics. In the immediate neighbourhood of an observer, falling freely in a gravitational field, there exists no gravitational field. We can therefore always regard an infinitesimally small region of the space-time continuum as Galilean. For such an infinitely small region there will be an inertial system (with the space co-ordinates, , , , and the time co-ordinate ) relatively to which we are to regard the laws of the special theory of relativity as valid. The quantity which is directly measurable by our unit measuring rods and clocks,

or its negative,

is therefore a uniquely determinate invariant for two neighbouring events (points in the four-dimensional continuum), provided that we use measuring rods that are equal to each other when brought together and superimposed, and clocks whose rates are the same when they are brought together. In this the physical assumption is essential that the relative lengths of two measuring rods and the relative rates of two clocks are independent, in principle, of their previous history. But this assumption is certainly warranted by experience; if it did not hold there could be no sharp spectral lines; for the single atoms of the same element certainly do not have the same history, and it would be absurd to suppose any relative difference in the structure of the single atoms due to their previous history if the mass and frequencies of the single atoms of the same element were always the same.

Space-time regions of finite extent are, in general, not Galilean, so that a gravitational field cannot be done away with by any choice of co-ordinates in a finite region. There is, therefore, no choice of co-ordinates for which the metrical relations of the special theory of relativity hold in a finite region. But the invariant always exists for two neighbouring points (events) of the continuum. This invariant may be expressed in arbitrary co-ordinates. If one observes that the local may be expressed linearly in terms of the co-ordinate differentials , may be expressed in the form



The functions describe, with respect to the arbitrarily chosen system of co-ordinates, the metrical relations of the space-time continuum and also the gravitational field. As in the special theory of relativity, we have to discriminate between time-like and space-like line elements in the four-dimensional continuum; owing to the change of sign introduced, time-like line elements have a real, space-like line elements an imaginary . The time-like can be measured directly by a suitably chosen clock.

According to what has been said, it is evident that the formulation of the general theory of relativity assumes a generalization of the theory of invariants and the theory of tensors; the question is raised as to the form of the equations which are co-variant with respect to arbitrary point transformations. The generalized calculus of tensors was developed by mathematicians long before the theory of relativity. Riemann first extended Gauss's train of thought to continua of any number of dimensions; with prophetic vision he saw the physical meaning of this generalization of Euclid's geometry. Then followed the development of the theory in the form of the calculus of tensors, particularly by Ricci and Levi-Civita. This is the place for a brief presentation of the most important mathematical concepts and operations of this calculus of tensors.

We designate four quantities, which are defined as functions of the with respect to every system of co-ordinates, as components, , of a contra-variant vector, if they transform in a change of co-ordinates as the co-ordinate differentials . We therefore have

Besides these contra-variant vectors, there are also co-variant vectors. If are the components of a co-variant vector, these vectors are transformed according to the rule

The definition of a co-variant vector is chosen in such a way that a co-variant vector and a contra-variant vector together form a scalar according to the scheme,

Accordingly,

In particular, the derivatives of a scalar , are components of a co-variant vector, which, with the co-ordinate differentials, form the scalar ; we see from this example how natural is the definition of the co-variant vectors.

There are here, also, tensors of any rank, which may have co-variant or contra-variant character with respect to each index; as with vectors, the character is designated by the position of the index. For example, denotes a tensor of the second rank, which is co-variant with respect to the index , and contra-variant with respect to the index . The tensor character indicates that the equation of transformation is



Tensors may be formed by the addition and subtraction of tensors of equal rank and like character, as in the theory of invariants of orthogonal linear substitutions, for example,

The proof of the tensor character of depends upon (58).

Tensors may be formed by multiplication, keeping the character of the indices, just as in the theory of invariants of linear orthogonal transformations, for example,

The proof follows directly from the rule of transformation.

Tensors may be formed by contraction with respect to two indices of different character, for example,

The tensor character of determines the tensor character of . Proof—



The properties of symmetry and skew-symmetry of a tensor with respect to two indices of like character have the same significance as in the theory of invariants.

With this, everything essential has been said with regard to the algebraic properties of tensors.





The Fundamental Tensor. It follows from the invariance of for an arbitrary choice of the , in connexion with the condition of symmetry consistent with (55), that the are components of a symmetrical co-variant tensor (Fundamental Tensor). Let us form the determinant, , of the , and also the minors, divided by , corresponding to the single . These minors, divided by , will be denoted by , and their co-variant character is not yet known. Then we have



If we form the infinitely small quantities (co-variant vectors)

multiply by and sum over the , we obtain, by the use of (62),

Since the ratios of the , are arbitrary, and the as well as the are components of vectors, it follows that the are the components of a contra-variant tensor[15] (contra-variant fundamental tensor). The tensor character of (mixed fundamental tensor) accordingly follows, by (62). By means of the fundamental tensor, instead of tensors with co-variant index character, we can introduce tensors with contra-variant index character, and conversely. For example,



[15]If we multiply (64) by , sum over the , and replace the by a transformation to the accented system, we obtain

The statement made above follows from this, since, by (64), we must also have and both equations must hold for every choice of .





Volume Invariants. The volume element

is not an invariant. For by Jacobi's theorem,

But we can complement so that it becomes an invariant. If we form the determinant of the quantities

we obtain, by a double application of the theorem of multiplication of determinants,

We therefore get the invariant,





Formation of Tensors by Differentiation. Although the algebraic operations of tensor formation have proved to be as simple as in the special case of invariance with respect to linear orthogonal transformations, nevertheless in the general case, the invariant differential operations are, unfortunately, considerably more complicated. The reason for this is as follows. If is a contra-variant vector, the coefficients of its transformation, , are independent of position only if the transformation is a linear one. For then the vector components, , at a neighbouring point transform in the same way as the , from which follows the vector character of the vector differentials, and the tensor character of . But if the are variable this is no longer true.

That there are, nevertheless, in the general case, invariant differential operations for tensors, is recognized most satisfactorily in the following way, introduced by Levi-Civita and Weyl. Let () be a contra-variant vector whose components are given with respect to the co-ordinate system of the . Let and be two infinitesimally near points of the continuum. For the infinitesimal region surrounding the point , there is, according to our way of considering the matter, a co-ordinate system of the (with imaginary -co-ordinate) for which the continuum is Euclidean. Let be the co-ordinates of the vector at the point . Imagine a vector drawn at the point , using the local system of the , with the same co-ordinates (parallel vector through ), then this parallel vector is uniquely determined by the vector at and the displacement. We designate this operation, whose uniqueness will appear in the sequel, the parallel displacement of the vector from to the infinitesimally near point . If we form the vector difference of the vector () at the point and the vector obtained by parallel displacement from to , we get a vector which may be regarded as the differential of the vector () for the given displacement .

This vector displacement can naturally also be considered with respect to the co-ordinate system of the . If are the co-ordinates of the vector at , the co-ordinates of the vector displaced to along the interval (), then the do not vanish in this case. We know of these quantities, which do not have a vector character, that they must depend linearly and homogeneously upon the and the . We therefore put



In addition, we can state that the must be symmetrical with respect to the indices and . For we can assume from a representation by the aid of a Euclidean system of local co-ordinates that the same parallelogram will be described by the displacement of an element along a second element as by a displacement of along . We must therefore have

The statement made above follows from this, after interchanging the indices of summation, and , on the right-hand side.

Since the quantities determine all the metrical properties of the continuum, they must also determine the . If we consider the invariant of the vector that is, the square of its magnitude,

which is an invariant, this cannot change in a parallel displacement. We therefore have

or, by (67),



Owing to the symmetry of the expression in the brackets with respect to the indices and , this equation can be valid for an arbitrary choice of the vectors () and only when the expression in the brackets vanishes for all combinations of the indices. By a cyclic interchange of the indices , , , we obtain thus altogether three equations, from which we obtain, on taking into account the symmetrical property of the ,

in which, following Christoffel, the abbreviation has been used,



If we multiply (68) by and sum over the , we obtain

in which is the Christoffel symbol of the second kind. Thus the quantities are deduced from the . Equations (67) and (70) are the foundation for the following discussion.





Co-variant Differentiation of Tensors. If () is the vector resulting from an infinitesimal parallel displacement from to , and () the vector at the point , then the difference of these two,

is also a vector. Since this is the case for an arbitrary choice of the , it follows that

is a tensor, which we designate as the co-variant derivative of the tensor of the first rank (vector). Contracting this tensor, we obtain the divergence of the contra-variant tensor . In this we must observe that according to (70),

If we put, further,

a quantity designated by Weyl as the contra-variant tensor density[16] of the first rank, it follows that,

is a scalar density.

[16]This expression is justified, in that has a tensor character. Every tensor, when multiplied by , changes into a tensor density. We employ capital Gothic letters for tensor densities.



We get the law of parallel displacement for the co-variant vector by stipulating that the parallel displacement shall be effected in such a way that the scalar

remains unchanged, and that therefore

vanishes for every value assigned to (). We therefore get



From this we arrive at the co-variant derivative of the co-variant vector by the same process as that which led to (71),

By interchanging the indices and , and subtracting, we get the skew-symmetrical tensor,



For the co-variant differentiation of tensors of the second and higher ranks we may use the process by which (75) was deduced. Let, for example, () be a co-variant tensor of the second rank. Then is a scalar, if and are vectors. This expression must not be changed by the -displacement; expressing this by a formula, we get, using (67), , whence we get the desired co-variant derivative,



In order that the general law of co-variant differentiation of tensors may be clearly seen, we shall write down two co-variant derivatives deduced in an analogous way:

The general law of formation now becomes evident. From these formulae we shall deduce some others which are of interest for the physical applications of the theory.

In case is skew-symmetrical, we obtain the tensor

which is skew-symmetrical in all pairs of indices, by cyclic interchange and addition.

If, in (78), we replace by the fundamental tensor, , then the right-hand side vanishes identically; an analogous statement holds for (80) with respect to ; that is, the co-variant derivatives of the fundamental tensor vanish. That this must be so we see directly in the local system of co-ordinates.

In case is skew-symmetrical, we obtain from (80), by contraction with respect to and ,



In the general case, from (79) and (80), by contraction with respect to and , we obtain the equations,





The Riemann Tensor. If we have given a curve extending from the point to the point of the continuum, then a vector , given at , may, by a parallel displacement, be moved along the curve to . If the continuum is Euclidean (more generally, if by a suitable choice of co-ordinates the , are constants) then the vector obtained at as a result of this displacement does not depend upon the choice of the curve joining and . But otherwise, the result depends upon the path of the displacement.



FIG.4.





In this case, therefore, a vector suffers a change, (in its direction, not its magnitude), when it is carried from a point of a closed curve, along the curve, and back to P. We shall now calculate this vector change:

As in Stokes' theorem for the line integral of a vector around a closed curve, this problem may be reduced to the integration around a closed curve with infinitely small linear dimensions; we shall limit ourselves to this case.

We have, first, by (67),



In this, is the value of this quantity at the variable point of the path of integration. If we put

and denote the value of at by then we have, with sufficient accuracy,



Let, further, be the value obtained from by a parallel displacement along the curve from to . It may now easily be proved by means of (67) that - is infinitely small of the first order, while, for a curve of infinitely small dimensions of the first order, is infinitely small of the second order. Therefore there is an error of only the second order if we put



If we introduce these values of and into the integral, we obtain, neglecting all quantities of a higher order of small quantities than the second,

The quantity removed from under the sign of integration refers to the point . Subtracting from the integrand, we obtain

This skew-symmetrical tensor of the second rank, , characterizes the surface element bounded by the curve in magnitude and position. If the expression in the brackets in (85) were skew-symmetrical with respect to the indices and , we could conclude its tensor character from (85). We can accomplish this by interchanging the summation indices and in (85) and adding the resulting equation to (85). We obtain

in which



The tensor character of follows from (86); this is the Riemann curvature tensor of the fourth rank, whose properties of symmetry we do not need to go into. Its vanishing is a sufficient condition (disregarding the reality of the chosen co-ordinates) that the continuum is Euclidean.

By contraction of the Riemann tensor with respect to the indices , , we obtain the symmetrical tensor of the second rank,

The last two terms vanish if the system of co-ordinates is so chosen that . From , we can form the scalar,





Straightest Geodetic Lines. A line may be constructed in such a way that its successive elements arise from each other by parallel displacements. This is the natural generalization of the straight line of the Euclidean geometry. For such a line, we have

The left-hand side is to be replaced by ,[17] so that we have

We get the same line if we find the line which gives a stationary value to the integral

between two points (geodetic line).

[17]The direction vector at a neighbouring point of the curve results, by a parallel displacement along the line element (), from the direction vector of each point considered.





LECTURE IV



THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

(continued)


WE are now in possession of the mathematical apparatus which is necessary to formulate the laws of the general theory of relativity. No attempt will be made in this presentation at systematic completeness, but single results and possibilities will be developed progressively from what is known and from the results obtained. Such a presentation is most suited to the present provisional state of our knowledge.

A material particle upon which no force acts moves, according to the principle of inertia, uniformly in a straight line. In the four-dimensional continuum of the special theory of relativity (with real time co-ordinate) this is a real straight line. The natural, that is, the simplest, generalization of the straight line which is plausible in the system of concepts of Riemann's general theory of invariants is that of the straightest, or geodetic, line. We shall accordingly have to assume, in the sense of the principle of equivalence, that the motion of a material particle, under the action only of inertia and gravitation, is described by the equation,

In fact, this equation reduces to that of a straight line if all the components, , of the gravitational field vanish.

How are these equations connected with Newton's equations of motion? According to the special theory of relativity, the as well as the , have the values, with respect to an inertial system (with real time co-ordinate and suitable choice of the sign of ),

The equations of motion then become

We shall call this the "first approximation" to the -field. In considering approximations it is often useful, as in the special theory of relativity, to use an imaginary -co-ordinate, as then the . to the first approximation, assume the values

These values may be collected in the relation

To the second approximation we must then put

where the are to be regarded as small of the first order.

Both terms of our equation of motion are then small of the first order. If we neglect terms which, relatively to these, are small of the first order, we have to put

We shall now introduce an approximation of a second kind. Let the velocity of the material particles be very small compared to that of light. Then will be the same as the time differential, . Further, , , will vanish compared to . We shall assume, in addition, that the gravitational field varies so little with the time that the derivatives of the by may be neglected. Then the equation of motion (for = 1,2,3) reduces to

This equation is identical with Newton's equation of motion for a material particle in a gravitational field, if we identify with the potential of the gravitational field; whether or not this is allowable, naturally depends upon the field equations of gravitation, that is, it depends upon whether or not this quantity satisfies, to a first approximation, the same laws of the field as the gravitational potential in Newton's theory. A glance at (90) and (90a) shows that the actually do play the rôle of the intensity of the gravitational field. These quantities do not have a tensor character.

Equations (90) express the influence of inertia and gravitation upon the material particle. The unity of inertia and gravitation is formally expressed by the fact that the whole left-hand side of (90) has the character of a tensor (with respect to any transformation of co-ordinates), but the two terms taken separately do not have tensor character, so that, in analogy with Newton's equations, the first term would be regarded as the expression for inertia, and the second as the expression for the gravitational force.

We must next attempt to find the laws of the gravitational field. For this purpose, Poisson's equation,

of the Newtonian theory must serve as a model. This equation has its foundation in the idea that the gravitational field arises from the density of ponderable matter. It must also be so in the general theory of relativity. But our investigations of the special theory of relativity have shown that in place of the scalar density of matter we have the tensor of energy per unit volume. In the latter is included not only the tensor of the energy of ponderable matter, but also that of the electromagnetic energy. We have seen, indeed, that in a more complete analysis the energy tensor can be regarded only as a provisional means of representing matter. In reality, matter consists of electrically charged particles, and is to be regarded itself as a part, in fact, the principal part, of the electromagnetic field. It is only the circumstance that we have not sufficient knowledge of the electromagnetic field of concentrated charges that compels us, provisionally, to leave undetermined in presenting the theory, the true form of this tensor. From this point of view our problem now is to introduce a tensor, . of the second rank, whose structure we do not know provisionally, and which includes in itself the energy density of the electromagnetic field and of ponderable matter; we shall denote this in the following as the "energy tensor of matter."

According to our previous results, the principles of momentum and energy are expressed by the statement that the divergence of this tensor vanishes (47c). In the general theory of relativity, we shall have to assume as valid the corresponding general co-variant equation. If () denotes the co-variant energy tensor of matter, the corresponding mixed tensor density, then, in accordance with (83), we must require that

be satisfied. It must be remembered that besides the energy density of the matter there must also be given an energy density of the gravitational field, so that there can be no talk of principles of conservation of energy and momentum for matter alone. This is expressed mathematically by the presence of the second term in (95), which makes it impossible to conclude the existence of an integral equation of the form of (49). The gravitational field transfers energy and momentum to the "matter," in that it exerts forces upon it and gives it energy; this is expressed by the second term in (95).

If there is an analogue of Poisson's equation in the general theory of relativity, then this equation must be a tensor equation for the tensor of the gravitational potential; the energy tensor of matter must appear on the right-hand side of this equation. On the left-hand side of the equation there must be a differential tensor in the . We have to find this differential tensor. It is completely determined by the following three conditions:—

1. It may contain no differential coefficients of the higher than the second.

2. It must be linear and homogeneous in these second differential coefficients.

3. Its divergence must vanish identically.

The first two of these conditions are naturally taken from Poisson's equation. Since it may be proved mathematically that all such differential tensors can be formed algebraically (i.e. without differentiation) from Riemann's tensor, our tensor must be of the form

in which and are defined by (88) and (89) respectively. Further, it may be proved that the third condition requires a to have the value . For the law of the gravitational field we therefore get the equation

Equation (95) is a consequence of this equation. denotes a constant, which is connected with the Newtonian gravitation constant.

In the following I shall indicate the features of the theory which are interesting from the point of view of physics, using as little as possible of the rather involved mathematical method. It must first be shown that the divergence of the left-hand side actually vanishes. The energy principle for matter may be expressed, by (83),

in which

The analogous operation, applied to the left-hand side of (96), will lead to an identity.

In the region surrounding each world-point there are systems of co-ordinates for which, choosing the -co-ordinate imaginary, at the given point,

and for which the first derivatives of the and the vanish. We shall verify the vanishing of the divergence of the left-hand side at this point. At this point the components vanish, so that we have to prove the vanishing only of

Introducing (88) and (70) into this expression, we see that the only terms that remain are those in which third derivatives of the enter. Since the are to be replaced by , we obtain, finally, only a few terms which may easily be seen to cancel each other. Since the quantity that we have formed has a tensor character, its vanishing is proved for every other system of co-ordinates also, and naturally for every other four-dimensional point. The energy principle of matter (97) is thus a mathematical consequence of the field equations (96).

In order to learn whether the equations (96) are consistent with experience, we must, above all else, find out whether they lead to the Newtonian theory as a first approximation. For this purpose we must introduce various approximations into these equations. We already know that Euclidean geometry and the law of the constancy of the velocity of light are valid, to a certain approximation, in regions of a great extent, as in the planetary system. If, as in the special theory of relativity, we take the fourth co-ordinate imaginary, this means that we must put

in which the are so small compared to 1 that we can neglect the higher powers of the and their derivatives. If we do this, we learn nothing about the structure of the gravitational held, or of metrical space of cosmical dimensions, but we do learn about the influence of neighbouring masses upon physical phenomena.

Before carrying through this approximation we shall transform (96). We multiply (96) by , summed over the and observing the relation which follows from the definition of the ,

we obtain the equation

If we put this value of in (96) we obtain

When the approximation which has been mentioned is carried out, we obtain for the left-hand side,

or

in which has been put



We must now note that equation (96) is valid for any system of co-ordinates. We have already specialized the system of co-ordinates in that we have chosen it so that within the region considered the differ infinitely little from the constant values . But this condition remains satisfied in any infinitesimal change of co-ordinates, so that there are still four conditions to which the may be subjected, provided these conditions do not conflict with the conditions for the order of magnitude of the . We shall now assume that the system of co-ordinates is so chosen that the four relations—

are satisfied. Then (96a) takes the form

These equations may be solved by the method, familiar in electrodynamics, of retarded potentials; we get, in an easily understood notation,



In order to see in what sense this theory contains the Newtonian theory, we must consider in greater detail the energy tensor of matter. Considered phenomenologically, this energy tensor is composed of that of the electromagnetic field and of matter in the narrower sense. If we consider the different parts of this energy tensor with respect to their order of magnitude, it follows from the results of the special theory of relativity that the contribution of the electromagnetic field practically vanishes in comparison to that of ponderable matter. In our system of units, the energy of one gram of matter is equal to 1, compared to which the energy of the electric fields may be ignored, and also the energy of deformation of matter, and even the chemical energy. We get an approximation that is fully sufficient for our purpose if we put

In this, is the density at rest, that is, the density of the ponderable matter, in the ordinary sense, measured with the aid of a unit measuring rod, and referred to a Galilean system of co-ordinates moving with the matter.

We observe, further, that in the co-ordinates we have chosen, we shall make only a relatively small error if we replace the by , so that we put



The previous developments are valid however rapidly the masses which generate the field may move relatively to our chosen system of quasi-Galilean co-ordinates. But in astronomy we have to do with masses whose velocities, relatively to the co-ordinate system employed, are always small compared to the velocity of light, that is, small compared to 1, with our choice of the unit of time. We therefore get an approximation which is sufficient for nearly all practical purposes if in (101) we replace the retarded potential by the ordinary (non-retarded) potential, and if, for the masses which generate the field, we put

Then we get for and the values

For we get the value , and, finally, for the values,



We thus get, from (101),

while all the other , vanish. The least of these equations, in connexion with equation (90a), contains Newton's theory of gravitation. If we replace by we get

We see that the Newtonian gravitation constant , is connected with the constant that enters into our field equations by the relation

From the known numerical value of , it therefore follows that

From (101) we see that even in the first approximation the structure of the gravitational field differs fundamentally from that which is consistent with the Newtonian theory; this difference lies in the fact that the gravitational potential has the character of a tensor and not a scalar. This was not recognized in the past because only the component , to a first approximation, enters the equations of motion of material particles.

In order now to be able to judge the behaviour of measuring rods and clocks from our results, we must observe the following. According to the principle of equivalence, the metrical relations of the Euclidean geometry are valid relatively to a Cartesian system of reference of infinitely small dimensions, and in a suitable state of motion (freely falling, and without rotation). We can make the same statement for local systems of co-ordinates which, relatively to these, have small accelerations, and therefore for such systems of co-ordinates as are at rest relatively to the one we have selected. For such a local system, we have, for two neighbouring point events,

where is measured directly by a measuring rod and by a clock at rest relatively to the system; these are the naturally measured lengths and times. Since , on the other hand, is known in terms of the co-ordinates employed in finite regions, in the form

we have the possibility of getting the relation between naturally measured lengths and times, on the one hand, and the corresponding differences of co-ordinates, on the other hand. As the division into space and time is in agreement with respect to the two systems of co-ordinates, so when we equate the two expressions for we get two relations. If, by (101a), we put

we obtain, to a sufficiently close approximation,



The unit measuring rod has therefore the length,

in respect to the system of co-ordinates we have selected. The particular system of co-ordinates we have selected insures that this length shall depend only upon the place, and not upon the direction. If we had chosen a different system of co-ordinates this would not be so. But however we may choose a system of co-ordinates, the laws of configuration of rigid rods do not agree with those of Euclidean geometry; in other words, we cannot choose any system of co-ordinates so that the co-ordinate differences, , , , corresponding to the ends of a unit measuring rod, oriented in any way, shall always satisfy the relation . In this sense space is not Euclidean, but "curved." It follows from the second of the relations above that the interval between two beats of the unit clock ( = 1) corresponds to the "time"

in the unit used in our system of co-ordinates. The rate of a clock is accordingly slower the greater is the mass of the ponderable matter in its neighbourhood. We therefore conclude that spectral lines which are produced on the sun's surface will be displaced towards the red, compared to the corresponding lines produced on the earth, by about 2 • 10-6 of their wave-lengths. At first, this important consequence of the theory appeared to conflict with experiment; but results obtained during the past year seem to make the existence of this effect more probable, and it can hardly be doubted that this consequence of the theory will be confirmed within the next year.

Another important consequence of the theory, which can be tested experimentally, has to do with the path of rays of light. In the general theory of relativity also the velocity of light is everywhere the same, relatively to a local inertial system. This velocity is unity in our natural measure of time. The law of the propagation of light in general co-ordinates is therefore, according to the general theory of relativity, characterized, by the equation

To within the approximation which we are using, and in the system of co-ordinates which we have selected, the velocity of light is characterized, according to (106), by the equation

The velocity of light , is therefore expressed in our co-ordinates by

We can therefore draw the conclusion from this, that a ray of light passing near a large mass is deflected. If we imagine the sun, of mass concentrated at the origin of our system of co-ordinates, then a ray of fight, travelling parallel to the -axis. in the plane, at a distance from the origin, will be deflected, in all, by an amount

towards the sun. On performing the integration we get



The existence of this deflection, which amounts to 1.7'' for equal to the radius of the sun, was confirmed, with remarkable accuracy, by the English Solar Eclipse Expedition in 1919, and most careful preparations have been made to get more exact observational data at the solar eclipse in 1922. It should be noted that this result, also, of the theory is not influenced by our arbitrary choice of a system of co-ordinates.

This is the place to speak of the third consequence of the theory which can be tested by observation, namely, that which concerns the motion of the perihelion of the planet Mercury. The secular changes in the planetary orbits are known with such accuracy that the approximation we have been using is no longer sufficient for a comparison of theory and observation. It is necessary to go back to the general field equations (96). To solve this problem I made use of the method of successive approximations. Since then, however, the problem of the central symmetrical statical gravitational field has been completely solved by Schwarzschild and others; the derivation given by H. Weyl in his book, "Raum-Zeit-Materie," is particularly elegant. The calculation can be simplified somewhat if we do not go back directly to the equation (96), but base it upon a principle of variation that is equivalent to this equation. I shall indicate the procedure only in so far as is necessary for understanding the method.

In the case of a statical field, must have the form

where the summation on the right-hand side of the last equation is to be extended over the space variables only. The central symmetry of the field requires the , to be of the form,

, and are functions of only. One of these three functions can be chosen arbitrarily, because our system of co-ordinates is, a priori, completely arbitrary; for by a substitution

we can always insure that one of these three functions shall be an assigned function of '. In place of (110) we can therefore put, without limiting the generality,



In this way the are expressed in terms of the two quantities and . These are to be determined as functions of , by introducing them into equation (96), after first calculating the from (109) and (110a). We have



With the help of these results, the field equations furnish Schwarzschild's solution:

in which we have put



denotes the sun's mass, centrally symmetrically placed about the origin of co-ordinates; the solution (109) is valid only outside of this mass, where all the vanish. If the motion of the planet takes place in the plane then we must replace (109a) by



The calculation of the planetary motion depends upon equation (90). From the first of equations (110b) and (90) we get, for the indices 1, 2, 3,

or, if we integrate, and express the result in polar co-ordinates,



From (90), for = 4, we get

From this, after multiplication by and integration, we have



In (109c), (111) and (112) we have three equations between the four variables , , and , from which the motion of the planet may be calculated in the same way as in classical mechanics. The most important result we get from this is a secular rotation of the elliptic orbit of the planet in the same sense as the revolution of the planet, amounting in radians per revolution to

where

This expression furnishes the explanation of the motion of the perihelion of the planet Mercury, which has been known for a hundred years (since Leverrier), and for which theoretical astronomy has hitherto been unable satisfactorily to account.

There is no difficulty in expressing Maxwell's theory of the electromagnetic field in terms of the general theory of relativity; this is done by application of the tensor formation (81), (82) and (77). Let be a tensor of the first rank, to be denoted as an electromagnetic 4-potential; then an electromagnetic field tensor may be defined by the relations,

The second of Maxwell's systems of equations is then defined by the tensor equation, resulting from this,

and the first of Maxwell's systems of equations is defined by the tensor-density relation

in which

If we introduce the energy tensor of the electromagnetic field into the right-hand side of (96), we obtain (115), for the special case = 0, as a consequence of (96) by taking the divergence. This inclusion of the theory of electricity in the scheme of the general theory of relativity has been considered arbitrary and unsatisfactory by many theoreticians. Nor can we in this way conceive of the equilibrium of the electricity which constitutes the elementary electrically charged particles. A theory in which the gravitational field and the electromagnetic field enter as an essential entity would be much preferable. H. Weyl, and recently Th. Kaluza, have discovered some ingenious theorems along this direction; but concerning them, I am convinced that they do not bring us nearer to the true solution of the fundamental problem. I shall not go into this further, but shall give a brief discussion of the so-called cosmological problem, for without this, the considerations regarding the general theory of relativity would, in a certain sense, remain unsatisfactory.

Our previous considerations, based upon the field equations (96), had for a foundation the conception that space on the whole is Galilean-Euclidean, and that this character is disturbed only by masses embedded in it. This conception was certainly justified as long as we were dealing with spaces of the order of magnitude of those that astronomy has to do with. But whether portions of the universe, however large they may be, are quasi-Euclidean, is a wholly different question. We can make this clear by using an example from the theory of surfaces which we have employed many times. If a portion of a surface is observed by the eye to be practically plane, it does not at all follow that the whole surface has the form of a plane; the surface might just as well be a sphere, for example, of sufficiently large radius. The question as to whether the universe as a whole is non-Euclidean was much discussed from the geometrical point of view before the development of the theory of relativity. But with the theory of relativity, this problem has entered upon a new stage, for according to this theory the geometrical properties of bodies are not independent, but depend upon the distribution of masses.

If the universe were quasi-Euclidean, then Mach was wholly wrong in his thought that inertia, as well as gravitation, depends upon a kind of mutual action between bodies. For in this case, with a suitably selected system of co-ordinates, the would be constant at infinity, as they are in the special theory of relativity, while within finite regions the would differ from these constant values by small amounts only, with a suitable choice of co-ordinates, as a result of the influence of the masses in finite regions. The physical properties of space would not then be wholly independent, that is, uninfluenced by matter, but in the main they would be, and only in small measure, conditioned by matter. Such a dualistic conception is even in itself not satisfactory; there are, however, some important physical arguments against it, which we shall consider.

The hypothesis that the universe is infinite and Euclidean at infinity, is, from the relativistic point of view, a complicated hypothesis. In the language of the general theory of relativity it demands that the Riemann tensor of the fourth rank shall vanish at infinity, which furnishes twenty independent conditions, while only ten curvature components , enter into the laws of the gravitational field. It is certainly unsatisfactory to postulate such a far-reaching limitation without any physical basis for it.

But in the second place, the theory of relativity makes it appear probable that Mach was on the right road in his thought that inertia depends upon a mutual action of matter. For we shall show in the following that, according to our equations, inert masses do act upon each other in the sense of the relativity of inertia, even if only very feebly. What is to be expected along the line of Mach's thought?

1. The inertia of a body must increase when ponderable masses are piled up in its neighbourhood.

2. A body must experience an accelerating force when neighbouring masses are accelerated, and, in fact, the force must be in the same direction as the acceleration.

3. A rotating hollow body must generate inside of itself a "Coriolis field," which deflects moving bodies in the sense of the rotation, and a radial centrifugal field as well.

We shall now show that these three effects, which are to be expected in accordance with Mach's ideas, are actually present according to our theory, although their magnitude is so small that confirmation of them by laboratory experiments is not to be thought of. For this purpose we shall go back to the equations of motion of a material particle (90), and carry the approximations somewhat further than was done in equation (90a).

First, we consider as small of the first order. The square of the velocity of masses moving under the influence of the gravitational force is of the same order, according to the energy equation. It is therefore logical to regard the velocities of the material particles we are considering, as well as the velocities of the masses which generate the field, as small, of the order . We shall now carry out the approximation in the equations that arise from the field equations (101) and the equations of motion (90) so far as to consider terms, in the second member of (90), that are linear in those velocities. Further, we shall not put and equal to each other, but, corresponding to the higher approximation, we shall put

From (90) we obtain, at first,



From (101) we get, to the approximation sought for,

in which, in (117), and denote the space indices only.

On the right-hand side of (116) we can replace 1 + by 1 and by . It is easy to see, in addition, that to this degree of approximation we must put

in which , and denote space indices. We therefore obtain from (116), in the usual vector notation,



The equations of motion, (118), show now, in fact, that

1. The inert mass is proportional to 1 + and therefore increases when ponderable masses approach the test body.

2. There is an inductive action of accelerated masses, of the same sign, upon the test body. This is the term .

3. A material particle, moving perpendicularly to the axis of rotation inside a rotating hollow body, is deflected in the sense of the rotation (Coriolis field). The centrifugal action, mentioned above, inside a rotating hollow body, also follows from the theory, as has been shown by Thirring.[18]

[18]That the centrifugal action must be inseparably connected with the existence of the Coriolis field may be recognized, even without calculation, in the special case of a co-ordinate system rotating uniformly relatively to an inertial system; our general co-variant equations naturally must apply to such a case.



Although all of these effects are inaccessible to experiment, because is so small, nevertheless they certainly exist according to the general theory of relativity. We must see in them a strong support for Mach's ideas as to the relativity of all inertial actions. If we think these ideas consistently through to the end we must expect the whole inertia, that is, the whole -field, to be determined by the matter of the universe, and not mainly by the boundary conditions at infinity.

For a satisfactory conception of the -field of cosmical dimensions, the fact seems to be of significance that the relative velocity of the stars is small compared to the velocity of light. It follows from this that, with a suitable choice of co-ordinates, is nearly constant in the universe, at least, in that part of the universe in which there is matter. The assumption appears natural, moreover, that there are stars in all parts of the universe, so that we may well assume that the inconstancy of depends only upon the circumstance that matter is not distributed continuously, but is concentrated in single celestial bodies and systems of bodies. If we are willing to ignore these more local non-uniformities of the density of matter and of the -field, in order to learn something of the geometrical properties of the universe as a whole, it appears natural to substitute for the actual distribution of masses a continuous distribution, and furthermore to assign to this distribution a uniform density . In this imagined universe all points with space directions will be geometrically equivalent; with respect to its space extension it will have a constant curvature, and will be cylindrical with respect to its -co-ordinate. The possibility seems to be particularly satisfying that the universe is spatially bounded and thus, in accordance with our assumption of the constancy of , is of constant curvature, being either spherical or elliptical; for then the boundary conditions at infinity which are so inconvenient from the standpoint of the general theory of relativity, may be replaced by the much more natural conditions for a closed surface.

According to what has been said, we are to put

in which the indices and run from 1 to 3 only. The will be such functions of , , as correspond to a three-dimensional continuum of constant positive curvature. We must now investigate whether such an assumption can satisfy the field equations of gravitation.

In order to be able to investigate this, we must first find what differential conditions the three-dimensional manifold of constant curvature satisfies. A spherical manifold of three dimensions, embedded in a Euclidean continuum of four dimensions,[19] is given by the equations

By eliminating , we get



[19]The aid of a fourth space dimension has naturally no significance except that of a mathematical artifice.



As far as terms of the third and higher degrees in the , we can put, in the neighbourhood of the origin of co-ordinates,



Inside the brackets are the of the manifold in the neighbourhood of the origin. Since the first derivatives of the , and therefore also the , vanish at the origin, the calculation of the for this manifold, by (88), is very simple at the origin. We have



Since the relation is universally co-variant, and since all points of the manifold are geometrically equivalent, this relation holds for every system of co-ordinates, and everywhere in the manifold. In order to avoid confusion with the four-dimensional continuum, we shall, in the following, designate quantities that refer to the three-dimensional continuum by Greek letters, and put



We now proceed to apply the field equations (96) to our special case. From (119) we get for the four-dimensional manifold,



For the right-hand side of (96) we have to consider the energy tensor for matter distributed like a cloud of dust. According to what has gone before we must therefore put

specialized for the case of rest. But in addition, we shall add a pressure term that may be physically established as follows. Matter consists of electrically charged particles. On the basis of Maxwell's theory these cannot be conceived of as electromagnetic fields free from singularities. In order to be consistent with the facts, it is necessary to introduce energy terms, not contained in Maxwell's theory, so that the single electric particles may hold together in spite of the mutual repulsions between their elements, charged with electricity of one sign. For the sake of consistency with this fact, Poincaré has assumed a pressure to exist inside these particles which balances the electrostatic repulsion. It cannot, however, be asserted that this pressure vanishes outside the particles. We shall be consistent with this circumstance if, in our phenomenological presentation, we add a pressure term. This must not, however, be confused with a hydrodynamical pressure, as it serves only for the energetic presentation of the dynamical relations inside matter. In this sense we put



In our special case we have, therefore, to put

Observing that the field equation (96) may be written in the form

we get from (96) the equations,

From this follows



If the universe is quasi-Euclidean, and its radius of curvature therefore infinite, then σ would vanish. But it is improbable that the mean density of matter in the universe is actually zero; this is our third argument against the assumption that the universe is quasi-Euclidean. Nor does it seem possible that our hypothetical pressure can vanish; the physical nature of this pressure can be appreciated only after we have a better theoretical knowledge of the electromagnetic field. According to the second of equations (123) the radius, , of the universe is determined in terms of the total mass, , of matter, by the equation

The complete dependence of the geometrical upon the physical properties becomes clearly apparent by means of this equation.

Thus we may present the following arguments against the conception of a space-infinite, and for the conception of a space-bounded, universe:—

1. From the standpoint of the theory of relativity, the condition for a closed surface is very much simpler than the corresponding boundary condition at infinity of the quasi-Euclidean structure of the universe.

2. The idea that Mach expressed, that inertia depends upon the mutual action of bodies, is contained, to a first approximation, in the equations of the theory of relativity; it follows from these equations that inertia depends, at least in part, upon mutual actions between masses. As it is an unsatisfactory assumption to make that inertia depends in part upon mutual actions, and in part upon an independent property of space, Mach's idea gains in probability. But this idea of Mach's corresponds only to a finite universe, bounded in space, and not to a quasi-Euclidean, infinite universe. From the standpoint of epistemology it is more satisfying to have the mechanical properties of space completely determined by matter, and this is the case only in a space-bounded universe.

3. An infinite universe is possible only if the mean density of matter in the universe vanishes. Although such an assumption is logically possible, it is less probable than the assumption that there is a finite mean density of matter in the universe.





INDEX


A

Accelerated masses, inductive

action of, 108

Addition and subtraction of

tensors, 14

—theorem of velocities, 38





B

Biot-Savart force, 44





C

Centrifugal force, 64

Clocks, moving, 38

Compressible viscous fluid, 22

Concept of space, 3

—time, 28

Conditions of orthogonality, 7

Congruence, theorems of, 3

Conservation principles, 54

Continuum, four-dimensional, 31

Contraction of tensors, 14

Contra-variant vectors, 69

—tensors, 71

Co-ordinates, preferred systems

of, 8

Co-variance of equation of

continuity, 21

Co-variant, 12 et seq.

—vector, 68

Criticism of principle of inertia, 62

Criticisms of theory of

relativity, 29

Curvilinear co-ordinates, 65





D

Differentiation of tensors, 73, 76

Displacement of spectral lines, 97





E

Energy and mass, 45, 49

—tensor of electromagnetic

field, 50

—of matter, 54

Equation of continuity, co-variance

of, 21

Equations of motion of material

particle, 50

Equivalence of mass and

energy, 49

Equivalent spaces of reference, 25

Euclidean geometry, 4





F

Finiteness of universe, 105

Fizeau, 28

Four-dimensional continuum, 31

Four-vector, 41

Fundamental tensor, 71





G

Galilean regions, 62

—transformation, 27

Gauss, 65

Geodetic lines, 82

Geometry, Euclidean, 4

Gravitation constant, 95

Gravitational mass, 60





H

Homogeneity of space, 17

Hydrodynamical equations, 54

Hypotheses of pre-relativity

physics, 73





I

Inductive action of accelerated

masses, 108

Inert and gravitational mass, equality

of, 60

Invariant, 9 et seq.

Isotropy of space, 17





K

Kaluza, 104





L

Levi-Civita, 73

Light-cone, 41

Light ray, path of, 98

Light-time, 33

Linear orthogonal

transformation, 7

Lorentz electromotive force, 44

—transformation, 31





M

Mach, 59, 105, 106, 109, 114

Mass and Energy, 45, 49

—equality of gravitational and

inert, 60

—gravitational, 60

Maxwell's equations, 23

Mercury, perihelion of, 99, 103

Michelson and Morley, 28

Minkowski, 32

Motion of particle, equations of, 50

Moving measuring rods and

clocks, 38

Multiplication of tensors, 14





N

Newtonian gravitation

constant, 95





O

Operations on tensors, 13 et seq.

Orthogonal transformations, linear, 7

Orthogonality, conditions of, 7





P

Path of light ray, 98

Perihelion of Mercury, 99, 103

Poisson's equation, 87

Preferred systems of

co-ordinates, 8

Pre-relativity physics, hypotheses

of, 26

Principle of equivalence, 61

—inertia, criticism of, 62

Principles of conservation, 54





R

Radius of Universe, 113

Rank of tensor, 13

Ray of light, path of, 98

Reference, space of, 3

Riemann, 68

—tensor, 79, 82, 105

Rods (measuring) and clocks in

motion, 38

Rotation, 63





S

Simultaneity, 17, 29

Sitter, 28

Skew-symmetrical tensor, 15

Solar Eclipse expedition (1919), 99

Space, concept of, 2

—Homogeneity of, 17

—Isotropy of, 17

Spaces of reference, 3

—equivalence of, 25

Special Lorentz transformation, 34

Spectral lines, displacement of, 97

Straightest lines, 82

Stress tensor, 22

Symmetrical tensor, 15

Systems of co-ordinates,

preferred, 8





T

Tensor, 12 et seq., 68 et seq.

—Addition and subtraction of, 14

—Contraction of, 14

—Fundamental, 71

—Multiplication of, 14

—operations, 13 et seq.

—Rank of, 13

—Symmetrical and

Skew-symmetrical, 15

Tensors, formation by

differentiation, 73

Theorem for addition of

velocities, 38

Theorems of congruence, 3

Theory of relativity, criticisms

of, 29

Thirring, 109

Time-concept, 28

Time-space concept, 31

Transformation, Galilean, 27

—Linear orthogonal, 7





U

Universe, Finiteness of, 105

—Radius of, 113





V

Vector, co-variant, 69

—contra-variant, 69

Velocities, addition theorem of, 38

Viscous compressible fluid, 22





W

Weyl, 73, 99, 104





PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, ABERDEEN





TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

This ebook was produced using OCR text provided by Northeastern University's Snell Library through the Internet Archive.

Minor typographical corrections and presentational changes have been made without comment.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEANING OF RELATIVITY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE





THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.



1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.



1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






Page 1
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Relativity: The Special and the General
Theory, by Albert Einstein
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.
Title: Relativity: The Special and the General Theory
A Popular Exposition, 3rd ed.
Author: Albert Einstein
Translator: Robert W. Lawson
Release Date: May 15, 2011 [eBook #36114]
Most recently updated: March 31, 2023
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-8
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RELATIVITY ***

Page 2
Produced by Andrew D. Hwang. (This ebook was produced using
OCR text generously provided by the University of Toronto
Robarts Library through the Internet Archive.)
transcriber’s note
The camera-quality files for this public-domain ebook
may be downloaded gratis at
www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/36114.
This ebook was produced using OCR text provided by
the University of Toronto Robarts Library through the
Internet Archive.
Minor typographical corrections and presentational
changes have been made without comment.
This PDF file is optimized for screen viewing, but may
easily be recompiled for printing. Please consult the
preamble of the LATEX source file for instructions and
other particulars.

Page 3
RELATIVITY
THE SPECIAL & THE GENERAL THEORY
A POPULAR EXPOSITION
BY
ALBERT EINSTEIN, Ph.D.
PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF BERLIN
AUTHORISED TRANSLATION BY
ROBERT W. LAWSON, D.Sc.
UNIVERSITY OF SHEFFIELD
WITH FIVE DIAGRAMS
AND A PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR
THIRD EDITION
METHUEN & CO. LTD.
36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
LONDON

Page 4
This Translation was first Published . . . . August 19th 1920
Second Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . September 1920
Third Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1920

Page 5
PREFACE
The present book is intended, as far as possible, to give an
exact insight into the theory of Relativity to those readers who,
from a general scientific and philosophical point of view, are
interested in the theory, but who are not conversant with the
mathematical apparatus1 of theoretical physics. The work pre￾sumes a standard of education corresponding to that of a uni￾versity matriculation examination, and, despite the shortness
of the book, a fair amount of patience and force of will on the
part of the reader. The author has spared himself no pains in his
endeavour to present the main ideas in the simplest and most in￾telligible form, and on the whole, in the sequence and connection
in which they actually originated. In the interest of clearness, it
appeared to me inevitable that I should repeat myself frequently,
without paying the slightest attention to the elegance of the pre￾sentation. I adhered scrupulously to the precept of that brilliant
theoretical physicist L. Boltzmann, according to whom matters
of elegance ought to be left to the tailor and to the cobbler. I
make no pretence of having withheld from the reader difficulties
1The mathematical fundaments of the special theory of relativity are to
be found in the original papers of H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowski,
published under the title Das Relativit¨atsprinzip (The Principle of Relativ￾ity) in B. G. Teubner’s collection of monographs Fortschritte der mathema￾tischen Wissenschaften (Advances in the Mathematical Sciences), also in
M. Laue’s exhaustive book Das Relativit¨atsprinzip—published by Friedr.
Vieweg & Son, Braunschweig. The general theory of relativity, together
with the necessary parts of the theory of invariants, is dealt with in the au￾thor’s book Die Grundlagen der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie (The Foun￾dations of the General Theory of Relativity) Joh. Ambr. Barth, 1916; this
book assumes some familiarity with the special theory of relativity.
iii

Page 6
RELATIVITY iv
which are inherent to the subject. On the other hand, I have
purposely treated the empirical physical foundations of the the￾ory in a “step-motherly” fashion, so that readers unfamiliar with
physics may not feel like the wanderer who was unable to see
the forest for trees. May the book bring some one a few happy
hours of suggestive thought!
December, 1916 A. EINSTEIN
NOTE TO THE THIRD EDITION
In the present year (1918) an excellent and detailed manual on
the general theory of relativity, written by H. Weyl, was pub￾lished by the firm Julius Springer (Berlin). This book, entitled
Raum—Zeit—Materie (Space—Time—Matter), may be warmly
recommended to mathematicians and physicists.

Page 7
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
Albert Einstein is the son of German-Jewish parents. He
was born in 1879 in the town of Ulm, W¨urtemberg, Germany.
His schooldays were spent in Munich, where he attended the
Gymnasium until his sixteenth year. After leaving school at
Munich, he accompanied his parents to Milan, whence he pro￾ceeded to Switzerland six months later to continue his studies.
From 1896 to 1900 Albert Einstein studied mathematics and
physics at the Technical High School in Zurich, as he intended
becoming a secondary school (Gymnasium) teacher. For some
time afterwards he was a private tutor, and having meanwhile
become naturalised, he obtained a post as engineer in the Swiss
Patent Office in 1902 which position he occupied till 1909. The
main ideas involved in the most important of Einstein’s theories
date back to this period. Amongst these may be mentioned:
The Special Theory of Relativity, Inertia of Energy, Theory of
the Brownian Movement, and the Quantum-Law of the Emission
and Absorption of Light (1905). These were followed some years
later by the Theory of the Specific Heat of Solid Bodies, and the
fundamental idea of the General Theory of Relativity.
During the interval 1909 to 1911 he occupied the post of
Professor Extraordinarius at the University of Zurich, afterwards
being appointed to the University of Prague, Bohemia, where he
remained as Professor Ordinarius until 1912. In the latter year
Professor Einstein accepted a similar chair at the Polytechnikum,
Zurich, and continued his activities there until 1914, when he
received a call to the Prussian Academy of Science, Berlin, as
successor to Van’t Hoff. Professor Einstein is able to devote
himself freely to his studies at the Berlin Academy, and it was
v

Page 8
RELATIVITY vi
here that he succeeded in completing his work on the General
Theory of Relativity (1915–17). Professor Einstein also lectures
on various special branches of physics at the University of Berlin,
and, in addition, he is Director of the Institute for Physical
Research of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft.
Professor Einstein has been twice married. His first wife,
whom he married at Berne in 1903, was a fellow-student from
Serbia. There were two sons of this marriage, both of whom are
living in Zurich, the elder being sixteen years of age. Recently
Professor Einstein married a widowed cousin, with whom he is
now living in Berlin.
R. W. L.

Page 9
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE
In presenting this translation to the English-reading public, it
is hardly necessary for me to enlarge on the Author’s prefatory
remarks, except to draw attention to those additions to the book
which do not appear in the original.
At my request, Professor Einstein kindly supplied me with a
portrait of himself, by one of Germany’s most celebrated artists.
Appendix III, on “The Experimental Confirmation of the Gen￾eral Theory of Relativity,” has been written specially for this
translation. Apart from these valuable additions to the book,
I have included a biographical note on the Author, and, at the
end of the book, an Index and a list of English references to
the subject. This list, which is more suggestive than exhaustive,
is intended as a guide to those readers who wish to pursue the
subject farther.
I desire to tender my best thanks to my colleagues Professor
S. R. Milner, D.Sc., and Mr. W. E. Curtis, A.R.C.Sc., F.R.A.S.,
also to my friend Dr. Arthur Holmes, A.R.C.Sc., F.G.S., of
the Imperial College, for their kindness in reading through the
manuscript, for helpful criticism, and for numerous suggestions.
I owe an expression of thanks also to Messrs. Methuen for their
ready counsel and advice, and for the care they have bestowed
on the work during the course of its publication.
ROBERT W. LAWSON
The Physics Laboratory
The University of Sheffield
June 12, 1920
vii

Page 10
CONTENTS
PART I
The Special Theory of Relativity
PAGE
I. Physical Meaning of Geometrical Propositions. . . . . . . . . . 1
II. The System of Co-ordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
III. Space and Time in Classical Mechanics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
IV. The Galileian System of Co-ordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
V. The Principle of Relativity (In the Restricted Sense) . . 11
VI. The Theorem of the Addition of Velocities employed in
Classical Mechanics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
VII. The Apparent Incompatibility of the Law of
Propagation of Light with the Principle of
Relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
VIII. On the Idea of Time in Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
IX. The Relativity of Simultaneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
X. On the Relativity of the Conception of Distance . . . . . . 26
XI. The Lorentz Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
XII. The Behaviour of Measuring-Rods and Clocks in
Motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
XIII. Theorem of the Addition of Velocities. The
Experiment of Fizeau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
viii

Page 11
CONTENTS ix
PAGE
XIV. The Heuristic Value of the Theory of Relativity . . . . . . . 40
XV. General Results of the Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
XVI. Experience and the Special Theory of Relativity . . . . . . 47
XVII. Minkowski’s Four-dimensional Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
PART II
The General Theory of Relativity
XVIII. Special and General Principle of Relativity. . . . . . . . . . . . 55
XIX. The Gravitational Field. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
XX. The Equality of Inertial and Gravitational Mass as an
Argument for the General Postulate of Relativity . 62
XXI. In what Respects are the Foundations of Classical
Mechanics and of the Special Theory of Relativity
unsatisfactory? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
XXII. A Few Inferences from the General Principle of
Relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
XXIII. Behaviour of Clocks and Measuring-Rods on a
Rotating Body of Reference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
XXIV. Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Continuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
XXV. Gaussian Co-ordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
XXVI. The Space-Time Continuum of the Special Theory of
Relativity considered as a Euclidean Continuum . . 85
XXVII. The Space-Time Continuum of the General Theory of
Relativity is not a Euclidean Continuum . . . . . . . . . . 87
XXVIII. Exact Formulation of the General Principle of
Relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
XXIX. The Solution of the Problem of Gravitation on the
Basis of the General Principle of Relativity . . . . . . . 93

Page 12
x
PART III
Considerations on the Universe as a Whole
PAGE
XXX. Cosmological Difficulties of Newton’s Theory. . . . . . . . . . 98
XXXI. The Possibility of a “Finite” and yet “Unbounded”
Universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
XXXII. The Structure of Space according to the General
Theory of Relativity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
APPENDICES
I. Simple Derivation of the Lorentz Transformation
[Supplementary to Section XI] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
II. Minkowski’s Four-dimensional Space (“World”)
[Supplementary to Section XVII] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
III. The Experimental Confirmation of the General Theory of
Relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
(a) Motion of the Perihelion of Mercury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
(b) Deflection of Light by a Gravitational Field . . . . . . . . . . 119
(c) Displacement of Spectral Lines towards the Red . . . . . 122
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128

Page 13
RELATIVITY
THE SPECIAL AND THE GENERAL THEORY

Page 14
RELATIVITY
PART I
THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
I
PHYSICAL MEANING OF GEOMETRICAL
PROPOSITIONS
In your schooldays most of you who read this book made ac￾quaintance with the noble building of Euclid’s geometry, and you
remember—perhaps with more respect than love—the magnifi￾cent structure, on the lofty staircase of which you were chased
about for uncounted hours by conscientious teachers. By reason
of your past experience, you would certainly regard everyone
with disdain who should pronounce even the most out-of-the￾way proposition of this science to be untrue. But perhaps this
feeling of proud certainty would leave you immediately if some
one were to ask you: “What, then, do you mean by the assertion
that these propositions are true?” Let us proceed to give this
question a little consideration.
Geometry sets out from certain conceptions such as “plane,”
“point,” and “straight line,” with which we are able to associate
more or less definite ideas, and from certain simple propositions
(axioms) which, in virtue of these ideas, we are inclined to accept
as “true.” Then, on the basis of a logical process, the justifica￾tion of which we feel ourselves compelled to admit, all remaining
1

Page 15
RELATIVITY 2
propositions are shown to follow from those axioms, i.e. they are
proven. A proposition is then correct (“true”) when it has been
derived in the recognised manner from the axioms. The ques￾tion of the “truth” of the individual geometrical propositions is
thus reduced to one of the “truth” of the axioms. Now it has
long been known that the last question is not only unanswer￾able by the methods of geometry, but that it is in itself entirely
without meaning. We cannot ask whether it is true that only
one straight line goes through two points. We can only say that
Euclidean geometry deals with things called “straight lines,” to
each of which is ascribed the property of being uniquely deter￾mined by two points situated on it. The concept “true” does not
tally with the assertions of pure geometry, because by the word
“true” we are eventually in the habit of designating always the
correspondence with a “real” object; geometry, however, is not
concerned with the relation of the ideas involved in it to objects
of experience, but only with the logical connection of these ideas
among themselves.
It is not difficult to understand why, in spite of this, we feel
constrained to call the propositions of geometry “true.” Geo￾metrical ideas correspond to more or less exact objects in nature,
and these last are undoubtedly the exclusive cause of the genesis
of those ideas. Geometry ought to refrain from such a course, in
order to give to its structure the largest possible logical unity.
The practice, for example, of seeing in a “distance” two marked
positions on a practically rigid body is something which is lodged
deeply in our habit of thought. We are accustomed further to
regard three points as being situated on a straight line, if their
apparent positions can be made to coincide for observation with
one eye, under suitable choice of our place of observation.

Page 16
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 3
If, in pursuance of our habit of thought, we now supplement
the propositions of Euclidean geometry by the single proposition
that two points on a practically rigid body always correspond to
the same distance (line-interval), independently of any changes
in position to which we may subject the body, the propositions
of Euclidean geometry then resolve themselves into propositions
on the possible relative position of practically rigid bodies.1 Ge￾ometry which has been supplemented in this way is then to be
treated as a branch of physics. We can now legitimately ask
as to the “truth” of geometrical propositions interpreted in this
way, since we are justified in asking whether these propositions
are satisfied for those real things we have associated with the
geometrical ideas. In less exact terms we can express this by
saying that by the “truth” of a geometrical proposition in this
sense we understand its validity for a construction with ruler
and compasses.
Of course the conviction of the “truth” of geometrical propo￾sitions in this sense is founded exclusively on rather incomplete
experience. For the present we shall assume the “truth” of the
geometrical propositions, then at a later stage (in the general
theory of relativity) we shall see that this “truth” is limited,
and we shall consider the extent of its limitation.
1
It follows that a natural object is associated also with a straight line.
Three points A, B and C on a rigid body thus lie in a straight line when,
the points A and C being given, B is chosen such that the sum of the
distances AB and BC is as short as possible. This incomplete suggestion
will suffice for our present purpose.

Page 17
II
THE SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES
On the basis of the physical interpretation of distance which
has been indicated, we are also in a position to establish the
distance between two points on a rigid body by means of mea￾surements. For this purpose we require a “distance” (rod S)
which is to be used once and for all, and which we employ as a
standard measure. If, now, A and B are two points on a rigid
body, we can construct the line joining them according to the
rules of geometry; then, starting from A, we can mark off the
distance S time after time until we reach B. The number of
these operations required is the numerical measure of the dis￾tance AB. This is the basis of all measurement of length.1
Every description of the scene of an event or of the position
of an object in space is based on the specification of the point on
a rigid body (body of reference) with which that event or object
coincides. This applies not only to scientific description, but also
to everyday life. If I analyse the place specification “Trafalgar
Square, London,”2
I arrive at the following result. The earth is
the rigid body to which the specification of place refers; “Trafal￾gar Square, London,” is a well-defined point, to which a name
has been assigned, and with which the event coincides in space.3
1Here we have assumed that there is nothing left over, i.e. that the
measurement gives a whole number. This difficulty is got over by the use
of divided measuring-rods, the introduction of which does not demand any
fundamentally new method.
2
I have chosen this as being more familiar to the English reader than the
“Potsdamer Platz, Berlin,” which is referred to in the original. (R. W. L.)
3
It is not necessary here to investigate further the significance of the
4

Page 18
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 5
This primitive method of place specification deals only with
places on the surface of rigid bodies, and is dependent on the ex￾istence of points on this surface which are distinguishable from
each other. But we can free ourselves from both of these limita￾tions without altering the nature of our specification of position.
If, for instance, a cloud is hovering over Trafalgar Square, then
we can determine its position relative to the surface of the earth
by erecting a pole perpendicularly on the Square, so that it
reaches the cloud. The length of the pole measured with the
standard measuring-rod, combined with the specification of the
position of the foot of the pole, supplies us with a complete place
specification. On the basis of this illustration, we are able to see
the manner in which a refinement of the conception of position
has been developed.
(a) We imagine the rigid body, to which the place speci￾fication is referred, supplemented in such a manner that the
object whose position we require is reached by the completed
rigid body.
(b) In locating the position of the object, we make use
of a number (here the length of the pole measured with the
measuring-rod) instead of designated points of reference.
(c) We speak of the height of the cloud even when the pole
which reaches the cloud has not been erected. By means of op￾tical observations of the cloud from different positions on the
ground, and taking into account the properties of the propaga￾tion of light, we determine the length of the pole we should have
expression “coincidence in space.” This conception is sufficiently obvious
to ensure that differences of opinion are scarcely likely to arise as to its
applicability in practice.

Page 19
RELATIVITY 6
required in order to reach the cloud.
From this consideration we see that it will be advantageous
if, in the description of position, it should be possible by means
of numerical measures to make ourselves independent of the ex￾istence of marked positions (possessing names) on the rigid body
of reference. In the physics of measurement this is attained by
the application of the Cartesian system of co-ordinates.
This consists of three plane surfaces perpendicular to each
other and rigidly attached to a rigid body. Referred to a system
of co-ordinates, the scene of any event will be determined (for the
main part) by the specification of the lengths of the three per￾pendiculars or co-ordinates (x, y, z) which can be dropped from
the scene of the event to those three plane surfaces. The lengths
of these three perpendiculars can be determined by a series of
manipulations with rigid measuring-rods performed according
to the rules and methods laid down by Euclidean geometry.
In practice, the rigid surfaces which constitute the system of
co-ordinates are generally not available; furthermore, the mag￾nitudes of the co-ordinates are not actually determined by con￾structions with rigid rods, but by indirect means. If the results
of physics and astronomy are to maintain their clearness, the
physical meaning of specifications of position must always be
sought in accordance with the above considerations.1
We thus obtain the following result: Every description of
events in space involves the use of a rigid body to which such
events have to be referred. The resulting relationship takes
1A refinement and modification of these views does not become necessary
until we come to deal with the general theory of relativity, treated in the
second part of this book.

Page 20
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 7
for granted that the laws of Euclidean geometry hold for “dis￾tances,” the “distance” being represented physically by means
of the convention of two marks on a rigid body.

Page 21
III
SPACE AND TIME IN CLASSICAL MECHANICS
“The purpose of mechanics is to describe how bodies change
their position in space with time.” I should load my conscience
with grave sins against the sacred spirit of lucidity were I to
formulate the aims of mechanics in this way, without serious
reflection and detailed explanations. Let us proceed to disclose
these sins.
It is not clear what is to be understood here by “position”
and “space.” I stand at the window of a railway carriage which
is travelling uniformly, and drop a stone on the embankment,
without throwing it. Then, disregarding the influence of the air
resistance, I see the stone descend in a straight line. A pedes￾trian who observes the misdeed from the footpath notices that
the stone falls to earth in a parabolic curve. I now ask: Do the
“positions” traversed by the stone lie “in reality” on a straight
line or on a parabola? Moreover, what is meant here by motion
“in space”? From the considerations of the previous section the
answer is self-evident. In the first place, we entirely shun the
vague word “space,” of which, we must honestly acknowledge,
we cannot form the slightest conception, and we replace it by
“motion relative to a practically rigid body of reference.” The
positions relative to the body of reference (railway carriage or
embankment) have already been defined in detail in the preced￾ing section. If instead of “body of reference” we insert “system
of co-ordinates,” which is a useful idea for mathematical descrip￾tion, we are in a position to say: The stone traverses a straight
line relative to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the
8

Page 22
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 9
carriage, but relative to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached
to the ground (embankment) it describes a parabola. With the
aid of this example it is clearly seen that there is no such thing
as an independently existing trajectory (lit. “path-curve”1
), but
only a trajectory relative to a particular body of reference.
In order to have a complete description of the motion, we
must specify how the body alters its position with time; i.e. for
every point on the trajectory it must be stated at what time the
body is situated there. These data must be supplemented by
such a definition of time that, in virtue of this definition, these
time-values can be regarded essentially as magnitudes (results
of measurements) capable of observation. If we take our stand
on the ground of classical mechanics, we can satisfy this require￾ment for our illustration in the following manner. We imagine
two clocks of identical construction; the man at the railway￾carriage window is holding one of them, and the man on the
footpath the other. Each of the observers determines the posi￾tion on his own reference-body occupied by the stone at each
tick of the clock he is holding in his hand. In this connection
we have not taken account of the inaccuracy involved by the
finiteness of the velocity of propagation of light. With this and
with a second difficulty prevailing here we shall have to deal in
detail later.
1That is, a curve along which the body moves.

Page 23
IV
THE GALILEIAN SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES
As is well known, the fundamental law of the mechanics of
Galilei-Newton, which is known as the law of inertia, can be
stated thus: A body removed sufficiently far from other bodies
continues in a state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight
line. This law not only says something about the motion of
the bodies, but it also indicates the reference-bodies or systems
of co-ordinates, permissible in mechanics, which can be used
in mechanical description. The visible fixed stars are bodies
for which the law of inertia certainly holds to a high degree of
approximation. Now if we use a system of co-ordinates which is
rigidly attached to the earth, then, relative to this system, every
fixed star describes a circle of immense radius in the course of an
astronomical day, a result which is opposed to the statement of
the law of inertia. So that if we adhere to this law we must refer
these motions only to systems of co-ordinates relative to which
the fixed stars do not move in a circle. A system of co-ordinates
of which the state of motion is such that the law of inertia holds
relative to it is called a “Galileian system of co-ordinates.” The
laws of the mechanics of Galilei-Newton can be regarded as valid
only for a Galileian system of co-ordinates.
10

Page 24
V
THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY (IN THE
RESTRICTED SENSE)
In order to attain the greatest possible clearness, let us return
to our example of the railway carriage supposed to be travelling
uniformly. We call its motion a uniform translation (“uniform”
because it is of constant velocity and direction, “translation”
because although the carriage changes its position relative to the
embankment yet it does not rotate in so doing). Let us imagine a
raven flying through the air in such a manner that its motion, as
observed from the embankment, is uniform and in a straight line.
If we were to observe the flying raven from the moving railway
carriage, we should find that the motion of the raven would be
one of different velocity and direction, but that it would still be
uniform and in a straight line. Expressed in an abstract manner
we may say: If a mass m is moving uniformly in a straight
line with respect to a co-ordinate system K, then it will also
be moving uniformly and in a straight line relative to a second
co-ordinate system K′
, provided that the latter is executing a
uniform translatory motion with respect to K. In accordance
with the discussion contained in the preceding section, it follows
that:
If K is a Galileian co-ordinate system, then every other co￾ordinate system K′
is a Galileian one, when, in relation to K,
it is in a condition of uniform motion of translation. Relative
to K′
the mechanical laws of Galilei-Newton hold good exactly
as they do with respect to K.
We advance a step farther in our generalisation when we ex￾11

Page 25
RELATIVITY 12
press the tenet thus: If, relative to K, K′
is a uniformly moving
co-ordinate system devoid of rotation, then natural phenomena
run their course with respect to K′ according to exactly the same
general laws as with respect to K. This statement is called the
principle of relativity (in the restricted sense).
As long as one was convinced that all natural phenomena
were capable of representation with the help of classical me￾chanics, there was no need to doubt the validity of this princi￾ple of relativity. But in view of the more recent development
of electrodynamics and optics it became more and more evident
that classical mechanics affords an insufficient foundation for the
physical description of all natural phenomena. At this juncture
the question of the validity of the principle of relativity became
ripe for discussion, and it did not appear impossible that the
answer to this question might be in the negative.
Nevertheless, there are two general facts which at the outset
speak very much in favour of the validity of the principle of
relativity. Even though classical mechanics does not supply us
with a sufficiently broad basis for the theoretical presentation
of all physical phenomena, still we must grant it a considerable
measure of “truth,” since it supplies us with the actual motions
of the heavenly bodies with a delicacy of detail little short of
wonderful. The principle of relativity must therefore apply with
great accuracy in the domain of mechanics. But that a principle
of such broad generality should hold with such exactness in one
domain of phenomena, and yet should be invalid for another, is
a priori not very probable.
We now proceed to the second argument, to which, more￾over, we shall return later. If the principle of relativity (in the
restricted sense) does not hold, then the Galileian co-ordinate

Page 26
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 13
systems K, K′
, K′′, etc., which are moving uniformly relative to
each other, will not be equivalent for the description of natural
phenomena. In this case we should be constrained to believe
that natural laws are capable of being formulated in a particu￾larly simple manner, and of course only on condition that, from
amongst all possible Galileian co-ordinate systems, we should
have chosen one (K0) of a particular state of motion as our body
of reference. We should then be justified (because of its merits
for the description of natural phenomena) in calling this sys￾tem “absolutely at rest,” and all other Galileian systems K “in
motion.” If, for instance, our embankment were the system K0,
then our railway carriage would be a system K, relative to which
less simple laws would hold than with respect to K0. This di￾minished simplicity would be due to the fact that the carriage K
would be in motion (i.e. “really”) with respect to K0. In the
general laws of nature which have been formulated with refer￾ence to K, the magnitude and direction of the velocity of the
carriage would necessarily play a part. We should expect, for
instance, that the note emitted by an organ-pipe placed with its
axis parallel to the direction of travel would be different from
that emitted if the axis of the pipe were placed perpendicular
to this direction. Now in virtue of its motion in an orbit round
the sun, our earth is comparable with a railway carriage trav￾elling with a velocity of about 30 kilometres per second. If the
principle of relativity were not valid we should therefore expect
that the direction of motion of the earth at any moment would
enter into the laws of nature, and also that physical systems in
their behaviour would be dependent on the orientation in space
with respect to the earth. For owing to the alteration in direc￾tion of the velocity of revolution of the earth in the course of

Page 27
RELATIVITY 14
a year, the earth cannot be at rest relative to the hypothetical
system K0 throughout the whole year. However, the most care￾ful observations have never revealed such anisotropic properties
in terrestrial physical space, i.e. a physical non-equivalence of
different directions. This is very powerful argument in favour of
the principle of relativity.

Page 28
VI
THE THEOREM OF THE ADDITION OF
VELOCITIES EMPLOYED IN CLASSICAL
MECHANICS
Let us suppose our old friend the railway carriage to be trav￾elling along the rails with a constant velocity v, and that a man
traverses the length of the carriage in the direction of travel with
a velocity w. How quickly or, in other words, with what veloc￾ity W does the man advance relative to the embankment during
the process? The only possible answer seems to result from the
following consideration: If the man were to stand still for a sec￾ond, he would advance relative to the embankment through a
distance v equal numerically to the velocity of the carriage. As a
consequence of his walking, however, he traverses an additional
distance w relative to the carriage, and hence also relative to the
embankment, in this second, the distance w being numerically
equal to the velocity with which he is walking. Thus in total he
covers the distance W = v + w relative to the embankment in
the second considered. We shall see later that this result, which
expresses the theorem of the addition of velocities employed in
classical mechanics, cannot be maintained; in other words, the
law that we have just written down does not hold in reality. For
the time being, however, we shall assume its correctness.
15

Page 29
VII
THE APPARENT INCOMPATIBILITY OF THE
LAW OF PROPAGATION OF LIGHT WITH THE
PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY
There is hardly a simpler law in physics than that accord￾ing to which light is propagated in empty space. Every child at
school knows, or believes he knows, that this propagation takes
place in straight lines with a velocity c = 300, 000 km./sec. At
all events we know with great exactness that this velocity is
the same for all colours, because if this were not the case, the
minimum of emission would not be observed simultaneously for
different colours during the eclipse of a fixed star by its dark
neighbour. By means of similar considerations based on obser￾vations of double stars, the Dutch astronomer De Sitter was also
able to show that the velocity of propagation of light cannot de￾pend on the velocity of motion of the body emitting the light.
The assumption that this velocity of propagation is dependent
on the direction “in space” is in itself improbable.
In short, let us assume that the simple law of the constancy
of the velocity of light c (in vacuum) is justifiably believed by
the child at school. Who would imagine that this simple law has
plunged the conscientiously thoughtful physicist into the great￾est intellectual difficulties? Let us consider how these difficulties
arise.
Of course we must refer the process of the propagation of
light (and indeed every other process) to a rigid reference-body
(co-ordinate system). As such a system let us again choose our
embankment. We shall imagine the air above it to have been
16

Page 30
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 17
removed. If a ray of light be sent along the embankment, we see
from the above that the tip of the ray will be transmitted with
the velocity c relative to the embankment. Now let us suppose
that our railway carriage is again travelling along the railway
lines with the velocity v, and that its direction is the same as
that of the ray of light, but its velocity of course much less. Let
us inquire about the velocity of propagation of the ray of light
relative to the carriage. It is obvious that we can here apply the
consideration of the previous section, since the ray of light plays
the part of the man walking along relatively to the carriage.
The velocity W of the man relative to the embankment is here
replaced by the velocity of light relative to the embankment.
w is the required velocity of light with respect to the carriage,
and we have
w = c − v.
The velocity of propagation of a ray of light relative to the car￾riage thus comes out smaller than c.
But this result comes into conflict with the principle of rela￾tivity set forth in Section V. For, like every other general law of
nature, the law of the transmission of light in vacuo must, ac￾cording to the principle of relativity, be the same for the railway
carriage as reference-body as when the rails are the body of ref￾erence. But, from our above consideration, this would appear to
be impossible. If every ray of light is propagated relative to the
embankment with the velocity c, then for this reason it would
appear that another law of propagation of light must necessarily
hold with respect to the carriage—a result contradictory to the
principle of relativity.
In view of this dilemma there appears to be nothing else for

Page 31
RELATIVITY 18
it than to abandon either the principle of relativity or the sim￾ple law of the propagation of light in vacuo. Those of you who
have carefully followed the preceding discussion are almost sure
to expect that we should retain the principle of relativity, which
appeals so convincingly to the intellect because it is so natural
and simple. The law of the propagation of light in vacuo would
then have to be replaced by a more complicated law conformable
to the principle of relativity. The development of theoretical
physics shows, however, that we cannot pursue this course. The
epoch-making theoretical investigations of H. A. Lorentz on the
electrodynamical and optical phenomena connected with moving
bodies show that experience in this domain leads conclusively to
a theory of electromagnetic phenomena, of which the law of the
constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo is a necessary con￾sequence. Prominent theoretical physicists were therefore more
inclined to reject the principle of relativity, in spite of the fact
that no empirical data had been found which were contradictory
to this principle.
At this juncture the theory of relativity entered the arena.
As a result of an analysis of the physical conceptions of time
and space, it became evident that in reality there is not the
least incompatibility between the principle of relativity and the
law of propagation of light, and that by systematically holding
fast to both these laws a logically rigid theory could be arrived
at. This theory has been called the special theory of relativity to
distinguish it from the extended theory, with which we shall deal
later. In the following pages we shall present the fundamental
ideas of the special theory of relativity.

Page 32
VIII
ON THE IDEA OF TIME IN PHYSICS
Lightning has struck the rails on our railway embankment
at two places A and B far distant from each other. I make the
additional assertion that these two lightning flashes occurred
simultaneously. If I ask you whether there is sense in this state￾ment, you will answer my question with a decided “Yes.” But if
I now approach you with the request to explain to me the sense
of the statement more precisely, you find after some considera￾tion that the answer to this question is not so easy as it appears
at first sight.
After some time perhaps the following answer would occur
to you: “The significance of the statement is clear in itself and
needs no further explanation; of course it would require some
consideration if I were to be commissioned to determine by ob￾servations whether in the actual case the two events took place
simultaneously or not.” I cannot be satisfied with this answer
for the following reason. Supposing that as a result of ingenious
considerations an able meteorologist were to discover that the
lightning must always strike the places A and B simultaneously,
then we should be faced with the task of testing whether or not
this theoretical result is in accordance with the reality. We en￾counter the same difficulty with all physical statements in which
the conception “simultaneous” plays a part. The concept does
not exist for the physicist until he has the possibility of discov￾ering whether or not it is fulfilled in an actual case. We thus
require a definition of simultaneity such that this definition sup￾plies us with the method by means of which, in the present case,
19

Page 33
RELATIVITY 20
he can decide by experiment whether or not both the lightning
strokes occurred simultaneously. As long as this requirement is
not satisfied, I allow myself to be deceived as a physicist (and of
course the same applies if I am not a physicist), when I imagine
that I am able to attach a meaning to the statement of simul￾taneity. (I would ask the reader not to proceed farther until he
is fully convinced on this point.)
After thinking the matter over for some time you then offer
the following suggestion with which to test simultaneity. By
measuring along the rails, the connecting line AB should be
measured up and an observer placed at the mid-point M of
the distance AB. This observer should be supplied with an
arrangement (e.g. two mirrors inclined at 90◦
) which allows him
visually to observe both places A and B at the same time. If
the observer perceives the two flashes of lightning at the same
time, then they are simultaneous.
I am very pleased with this suggestion, but for all that I
cannot regard the matter as quite settled, because I feel con￾strained to raise the following objection: “Your definition would
certainly be right, if I only knew that the light by means of
which the observer at M perceives the lightning flashes travels
along the length A −→ M with the same velocity as along the
length B −→ M. But an examination of this supposition would
only be possible if we already had at our disposal the means of
measuring time. It would thus appear as though we were moving
here in a logical circle.”
After further consideration you cast a somewhat disdainful
glance at me—and rightly so—and you declare: “I maintain my
previous definition nevertheless, because in reality it assumes
absolutely nothing about light. There is only one demand to be

Page 34
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 21
made of the definition of simultaneity, namely, that in every real
case it must supply us with an empirical decision as to whether
or not the conception that has to be defined is fulfilled. That
my definition satisfies this demand is indisputable. That light
requires the same time to traverse the path A −→ M as for the
path B −→ M is in reality neither a supposition nor a hypothesis
about the physical nature of light, but a stipulation which I can
make of my own free will in order to arrive at a definition of
simultaneity.”
It is clear that this definition can be used to give an exact
meaning not only to two events, but to as many events as we care
to choose, and independently of the positions of the scenes of the
events with respect to the body of reference1
(here the railway
embankment). We are thus led also to a definition of “time”
in physics. For this purpose we suppose that clocks of identical
construction are placed at the points A, B and C of the railway
line (co-ordinate system), and that they are set in such a manner
that the positions of their pointers are simultaneously (in the
above sense) the same. Under these conditions we understand
by the “time” of an event the reading (position of the hands) of
that one of these clocks which is in the immediate vicinity (in
space) of the event. In this manner a time-value is associated
with every event which is essentially capable of observation.
1We suppose further, that, when three events A, B and C occur in
different places in such a manner that A is simultaneous with , and B is
simultaneous with C (simultaneous in the sense of the above definition),
then the criterion for the simultaneity of the pair of events A, C is also
satisfied. This assumption is a physical hypothesis about the law of prop￾agation of light; it must certainly be fulfilled if we are to maintain the law
of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo.

Page 35
RELATIVITY 22
This stipulation contains a further physical hypothesis, the
validity of which will hardly be doubted without empirical evi￾dence to the contrary. It has been assumed that all these clocks
go at the same rate if they are of identical construction. Stated
more exactly: When two clocks arranged at rest in different
places of a reference-body are set in such a manner that a par￾ticular position of the pointers of the one clock is simultaneous
(in the above sense) with the same position of the pointers of
the other clock, then identical “settings” are always simultane￾ous (in the sense of the above definition).

Page 36
IX
THE RELATIVITY OF SIMULTANEITY
Up to now our considerations have been referred to a particu￾lar body of reference, which we have styled a “railway embank￾ment.” We suppose a very long train travelling along the rails
with the constant velocity v and in the direction indicated in
Fig. 1. People travelling in this train will with advantage use
the train as a rigid reference-body (co-ordinate system); they
regard all events in reference to the train. Then every event
v M v
′
A M B
Train
Embankment
Fig. 1.
which takes place along the line also takes place at a particular
point of the train. Also the definition of simultaneity can be
given relative to the train in exactly the same way as with re￾spect to the embankment. As a natural consequence, however,
the following question arises:
Are two events (e.g. the two strokes of lightning A and B)
which are simultaneous with reference to the railway embank￾ment also simultaneous relatively to the train? We shall show
directly that the answer must be in the negative.
When we say that the lightning strokes A and B are simul￾taneous with respect to the embankment, we mean: the rays of
light emitted at the places A and B, where the lightning occurs,
meet each other at the mid-point M of the length A −→ B of
the embankment. But the events A and B also correspond to
23

Page 37
RELATIVITY 24
positions A and B on the train. Let M′ be the mid-point of the
distance A −→ B on the travelling train. Just when the flashes1
of lightning occur, this point M′ naturally coincides with the
point M, but it moves towards the right in the diagram with
the velocity v of the train. If an observer sitting in the posi￾tion M′
in the train did not possess this velocity, then he would
remain permanently at M, and the light rays emitted by the
flashes of lightning A and B would reach him simultaneously,
i.e. they would meet just where he is situated. Now in real￾ity (considered with reference to the railway embankment) he is
hastening towards the beam of light coming from B, whilst he
is riding on ahead of the beam of light coming from A. Hence
the observer will see the beam of light emitted from B earlier
than he will see that emitted from A. Observers who take the
railway train as their reference-body must therefore come to the
conclusion that the lightning flash B took place earlier than the
lightning flash A. We thus arrive at the important result:
Events which are simultaneous with reference to the em￾bankment are not simultaneous with respect to the train, and
vice versa (relativity of simultaneity). Every reference-body (co￾ordinate system) has its own particular time; unless we are told
the reference-body to which the statement of time refers, there
is no meaning in a statement of the time of an event.
Now before the advent of the theory of relativity it had al￾ways tacitly been assumed in physics that the statement of time
had an absolute significance, i.e. that it is independent of the
state of motion of the body of reference. But we have just seen
that this assumption is incompatible with the most natural def￾1As judged from the embankment.

Page 38
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 25
inition of simultaneity; if we discard this assumption, then the
conflict between the law of the propagation of light in vacuo and
the principle of relativity (developed in Section VII) disappears.
We were led to that conflict by the considerations of Sec￾tion VI, which are now no longer tenable. In that section we
concluded that the man in the carriage, who traverses the dis￾tance w per second relative to the carriage, traverses the same
distance also with respect to the embankment in each second of
time. But, according to the foregoing considerations, the time
required by a particular occurrence with respect to the carriage
must not be considered equal to the duration of the same oc￾currence as judged from the embankment (as reference-body).
Hence it cannot be contended that the man in walking travels
the distance w relative to the railway line in a time which is
equal to one second as judged from the embankment.
Moreover, the considerations of Section VI are based on yet a
second assumption, which, in the light of a strict consideration,
appears to be arbitrary, although it was always tacitly made
even before the introduction of the theory of relativity.

Page 39
X
ON THE RELATIVITY OF THE CONCEPTION OF
DISTANCE
Let us consider two particular points on the train1
travelling
along the embankment with the velocity v, and inquire as to
their distance apart. We already know that it is necessary to
have a body of reference for the measurement of a distance, with
respect to which body the distance can be measured up. It is
the simplest plan to use the train itself as reference-body (co￾ordinate system). An observer in the train measures the interval
by marking off his measuring-rod in a straight line (e.g. along
the floor of the carriage) as many times as is necessary to take
him from the one marked point to the other. Then the number
which tells us how often the rod has to be laid down is the
required distance.
It is a different matter when the distance has to be judged
from the railway line. Here the following method suggests itself.
If we call A′ and B′
the two points on the train whose distance
apart is required, then both of these points are moving with
the velocity v along the embankment. In the first place we
require to determine the points A and B of the embankment
which are just being passed by the two points A′ and B′ at a
particular time t—judged from the embankment. These points
A and B of the embankment can be determined by applying the
definition of time given in Section VIII. The distance between
these points A and B is then measured by repeated application
of the measuring-rod along the embankment.
1
e.g. the middle of the first and of the hundredth carriage.
26

Page 40
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 27
A priori it is by no means certain that this last measure￾ment will supply us with the same result as the first. Thus
the length of the train as measured from the embankment may
be different from that obtained by measuring in the train it￾self. This circumstance leads us to a second objection which
must be raised against the apparently obvious consideration of
Section VI. Namely, if the man in the carriage covers the dis￾tance w in a unit of time—measured from the train,—then this
distance—as measured from the embankment—is not necessarily
also equal to w.

Page 41
XI
THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION
The results of the last three sections show that the apparent
incompatibility of the law of propagation of light with the prin￾ciple of relativity (Section VII) has been derived by means of a
consideration which borrowed two unjustifiable hypotheses from
classical mechanics; these are as follows:
(1) The time-interval (time) between two events is inde￾pendent of the condition of motion of the body of ref￾erence.
(2) The space-interval (distance) between two points of a
rigid body is independent of the condition of motion of
the body of reference.
If we drop these hypotheses, then the dilemma of Section VII
disappears, because the theorem of the addition of velocities de￾rived in Section VI becomes invalid. The possibility presents
itself that the law of the propagation of light in vacuo may
be compatible with the principle of relativity, and the question
arises: How have we to modify the considerations of Section VI
in order to remove the apparent disagreement between these
two fundamental results of experience? This question leads to
a general one. In the discussion of Section VI we have to do
with places and times relative both to the train and to the em￾bankment. How are we to find the place and time of an event
in relation to the train, when we know the place and time of
the event with respect to the railway embankment? Is there
a thinkable answer to this question of such a nature that the
28

Page 42
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 29
law of transmission of light in vacuo does not contradict the
principle of relativity? In other words: Can we conceive of a
relation between place and time of the individual events relative
to both reference-bodies, such that every ray of light possesses
the velocity of transmission c relative to the embankment and
relative to the train? This question leads to a quite definite pos￾itive answer, and to a perfectly definite transformation law for
the space-time magnitudes of an event when changing over from
one body of reference to another.
Before we deal with this, we shall introduce the following
incidental consideration. Up to the present we have only con￾sidered events taking place along the embankment, which had
mathematically to assume the function of a straight line. In the
manner indicated in Section II we can imagine this reference￾body supplemented laterally and in a vertical direction by means
of a framework of rods, so that an event which takes place any￾where can be localised with reference to this framework. Sim￾ilarly, we can imagine the train travelling with the velocity v
to be continued across the whole of space, so that every event,
no matter how far off it may be, could also be localised with
respect to the second framework. Without committing any fun￾damental error, we can disregard the fact that in reality these
frameworks would continually interfere with each other, owing to
the impenetrability of solid bodies. In every such framework we
imagine three surfaces perpendicular to each other marked out,
and designated as “co-ordinate planes” (“co-ordinate system”).
A co-ordinate system K then corresponds to the embankment,
and a co-ordinate system K′
to the train. An event, wherever it
may have taken place, would be fixed in space with respect to K
by the three perpendiculars x, y, z on the co-ordinate planes,

Page 43
RELATIVITY 30
and with regard to time by a time-value t. Relative to K′
, the
same event would be fixed in respect of space and time by cor￾responding values x
′
, y
′
, z
′
, t
′
, which of course are not identical
with x, y, z, t. It has already been set forth in detail how these
magnitudes are to be regarded as results of physical measure￾ments.
v
v
v
K K′ x
x
′
y
y
′
z
z
′
Fig. 2.
Obviously our problem can be exactly formulated in the fol￾lowing manner. What are the values x
′
, y
′
, z
′
, t
′
, of an event with
respect to K′
, when the magnitudes x, y, z, t, of the same event
with respect to K are given? The relations must be so chosen
that the law of the transmission of light in vacuo is satisfied for
one and the same ray of light (and of course for every ray) with
respect to K and K′
. For the relative orientation in space of
the co-ordinate systems indicated in the diagram (Fig. 2), this
problem is solved by means of the equations:
x
′ =
x − vt
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
,

Page 44
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 31
y
′ = y,
z
′ = z,
t
′ =
t −
v
c
2
· x
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
.
This system of equations is known as the “Lorentz transforma￾tion.”1
If in place of the law of transmission of light we had taken
as our basis the tacit assumptions of the older mechanics as to
the absolute character of times and lengths, then instead of the
above we should have obtained the following equations:
x
′ = x − vt,
y
′ = y,
z
′ = z,
t
′ = t.
This system of equations is often termed the “Galilei transfor￾mation.” The Galilei transformation can be obtained from the
Lorentz transformation by substituting an infinitely large value
for the velocity of light c in the latter transformation.
Aided by the following illustration, we can readily see that,
in accordance with the Lorentz transformation, the law of the
transmission of light in vacuo is satisfied both for the reference￾body K and for the reference-body K′
. A light-signal is sent
1A simple derivation of the Lorentz transformation is given in Ap￾pendix I.

Page 45
RELATIVITY 32
along the positive x-axis, and this light-stimulus advances in
accordance with the equation
x = ct,
i.e. with the velocity c. According to the equations of the
Lorentz transformation, this simple relation between x and t
involves a relation between x
′ and t
′
. In point of fact, if we sub￾stitute for x the value ct in the first and fourth equations of the
Lorentz transformation, we obtain:
x
′ =
(c − v)t
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
,
t
′ =

1 −
v
c

t
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
,
from which, by division, the expression
x
′ = ct′
immediately follows. If referred to the system K′
, the propa￾gation of light takes place according to this equation. We thus
see that the velocity of transmission relative to the reference￾body K′
is also equal to c. The same result is obtained for
rays of light advancing in any other direction whatsoever. Of
course this is not surprising, since the equations of the Lorentz
transformation were derived conformably to this point of view.

Page 46
XII
THE BEHAVIOUR OF MEASURING-RODS AND
CLOCKS IN MOTION
I place a metre-rod in the x
′
-axis of K′
in such a manner
that one end (the beginning) coincides with the point x
′ = 0,
whilst the other end (the end of the rod) coincides with the
point x
′ = 1. What is the length of the metre-rod relatively to
the system K? In order to learn this, we need only ask where
the beginning of the rod and the end of the rod lie with respect
to K at a particular time t of the system K. By means of the
first equation of the Lorentz transformation the values of these
two points at the time t = 0 can be shown to be
x(beginning of rod) = 0 ·
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
,
x(end of rod) = 1 ·
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
,
the distance between the points being r
1 −
v
2
c
2
. But the metre￾rod is moving with the velocity v relative to K. It therefore
follows that the length of a rigid metre-rod moving in the di￾rection of its length with a velocity v is p
1 − v
2/c2 of a metre.
The rigid rod is thus shorter when in motion than when at rest,
and the more quickly it is moving, the shorter is the rod. For
the velocity v = c we should have p
1 − v
2/c2 = 0, and for still
greater velocities the square-root becomes imaginary. From this
we conclude that in the theory of relativity the velocity c plays
33

Page 47
RELATIVITY 34
the part of a limiting velocity, which can neither be reached nor
exceeded by any real body.
Of course this feature of the velocity c as a limiting velocity
also clearly follows from the equations of the Lorentz transfor￾mation, for these become meaningless if we choose values of v
greater than c.
If, on the contrary, we had considered a metre-rod at rest
in the x-axis with respect to K, then we should have found
that the length of the rod as judged from K′ would have
been p
1 − v
2/c2
; this is quite in accordance with the prin￾ciple of relativity which forms the basis of our considerations.
A priori it is quite clear that we must be able to learn some￾thing about the physical behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks
from the equations of transformation, for the magnitudes x, y,
z, t, are nothing more nor less than the results of measurements
obtainable by means of measuring-rods and clocks. If we had
based our considerations on the Galilei transformation we should
not have obtained a contraction of the rod as a consequence of
its motion.
Let us now consider a seconds-clock which is permanently
situated at the origin (x
′ = 0) of K′
. t
′ = 0 and t
′ = 1 are two
successive ticks of this clock. The first and fourth equations of
the Lorentz transformation give for these two ticks:
t = 0
and
t =
1
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
.

Page 48
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 35
As judged from K, the clock is moving with the velocity v; as
judged from this reference-body, the time which elapses between
two strokes of the clock is not one second, but 1
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
seconds,
i.e. a somewhat larger time. As a consequence of its motion
the clock goes more slowly than when at rest. Here also the
velocity c plays the part of an unattainable limiting velocity.

Page 49
XIII
THEOREM OF THE ADDITION OF VELOCITIES.
THE EXPERIMENT OF FIZEAU
Now in practice we can move clocks and measuring-rods only
with velocities that are small compared with the velocity of light;
hence we shall hardly be able to compare the results of the pre￾vious section directly with the reality. But, on the other hand,
these results must strike you as being very singular, and for that
reason I shall now draw another conclusion from the theory, one
which can easily be derived from the foregoing considerations,
and which has been most elegantly confirmed by experiment.
In Section VI we derived the theorem of the addition of ve￾locities in one direction in the form which also results from the
hypotheses of classical mechanics. This theorem can also be de￾duced readily from the Galilei transformation (Section XI). In
place of the man walking inside the carriage, we introduce a
point moving relatively to the co-ordinate system K′
in accor￾dance with the equation
x
′ = wt′
.
By means of the first and fourth equations of the Galilei trans￾formation we can express x
′ and t
′
in terms of x and t, and we
then obtain
x = (v + w)t.
This equation expresses nothing else than the law of motion
of the point with reference to the system K (of the man with
reference to the embankment). We denote this velocity by the
36

Page 50
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 37
symbol W, and we then obtain, as in Section VI,
W = v + w. (A)
But we can carry out this consideration just as well on the
basis of the theory of relativity. In the equation
x
′ = wt′
we must then express x
′ and t
′
in terms of x and t, making use
of the first and fourth equations of the Lorentz transformation.
Instead of the equation (A) we then obtain the equation
W =
v + w
1 +
vw
c
2
, (B)
which corresponds to the theorem of addition for velocities in
one direction according to the theory of relativity. The question
now arises as to which of these two theorems is the better in
accord with experience. On this point we are enlightened by a
most important experiment which the brilliant physicist Fizeau
performed more than half a century ago, and which has been
repeated since then by some of the best experimental physicists,
so that there can be no doubt about its result. The experiment
is concerned with the following question. Light travels in a mo￾tionless liquid with a particular velocity w. How quickly does it
travel in the direction of the arrow in the tube T (see the ac￾companying diagram, Fig. 3) when the liquid above mentioned
is flowing through the tube with a velocity v?
In accordance with the principle of relativity we shall cer￾tainly have to take for granted that the propagation of light

Page 51
RELATIVITY 38
always takes place with the same velocity w with respect to the
liquid, whether the latter is in motion with reference to other
bodies or not. The velocity of light relative to the liquid and
the velocity of the latter relative to the tube are thus known,
and we require the velocity of light relative to the tube.
It is clear that we have the problem of Section VI again be￾fore us. The tube plays the part of the railway embankment
or of the co-ordinate system K, the liquid plays the part of the
carriage or of the co-ordinate system K′
, and finally, the light
plays the part of the man walking along the carriage, or of the
v
T
Fig. 3.
moving point in the present section. If we denote the velocity
of the light relative to the tube by W, then this is given by the
equation (A) or (B), according as the Galilei transformation or
the Lorentz transformation corresponds to the facts. Experi￾ment1 decides in favour of equation (B) derived from the theory
of relativity, and the agreement is, indeed, very exact. Accord￾ing to recent and most excellent measurements by Zeeman, the
influence of the velocity of flow v on the propagation of light is
1Fizeau found W = w + v

1 −
1
n2

, where n =
c
w
is the index of
refraction of the liquid. On the other hand, owing to the smallness of vw
c
2
as compared with 1, we can replace (B) in the first place by W = (w +
v)

1 −
vw
c
2

, or to the same order of approximation by w + v

1 −
1
n2

,
which agrees with Fizeau’s result.

Page 52
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 39
represented by formula (B) to within one per cent.
Nevertheless we must now draw attention to the fact that
a theory of this phenomenon was given by H. A. Lorentz long
before the statement of the theory of relativity. This theory was
of a purely electrodynamical nature, and was obtained by the
use of particular hypotheses as to the electromagnetic structure
of matter. This circumstance, however, does not in the least
diminish the conclusiveness of the experiment as a crucial test
in favour of the theory of relativity, for the electrodynamics of
Maxwell-Lorentz, on which the original theory was based, in
no way opposes the theory of relativity. Rather has the latter
been developed from electrodynamics as an astoundingly sim￾ple combination and generalisation of the hypotheses, formerly
independent of each other, on which electrodynamics was built.

Page 53
XIV
THE HEURISTIC VALUE OF THE THEORY OF
RELATIVITY
Our train of thought in the foregoing pages can be epitomised
in the following manner. Experience has led to the conviction
that, on the one hand, the principle of relativity holds true,
and that on the other hand the velocity of transmission of light
in vacuo has to be considered equal to a constant c. By uniting
these two postulates we obtained the law of transformation for
the rectangular co-ordinates x, y, z and the time t of the events
which constitute the processes of nature. In this connection we
did not obtain the Galilei transformation, but, differing from
classical mechanics, the Lorentz transformation.
The law of transmission of light, the acceptance of which
is justified by our actual knowledge, played an important part
in this process of thought. Once in possession of the Lorentz
transformation, however, we can combine this with the principle
of relativity, and sum up the theory thus:
Every general law of nature must be so constituted that it is
transformed into a law of exactly the same form when, instead
of the space-time variables x, y, z, t of the original co-ordinate
system K, we introduce new space-time variables x
′
, y
′
, z
′
, t
′
of a co-ordinate system K′
. In this connection the relation be￾tween the ordinary and the accented magnitudes is given by the
Lorentz transformation. Or, in brief: General laws of nature are
co-variant with respect to Lorentz transformations.
This is a definite mathematical condition that the theory of
relativity demands of a natural law, and in virtue of this, the
40

Page 54
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 41
theory becomes a valuable heuristic aid in the search for general
laws of nature. If a general law of nature were to be found
which did not satisfy this condition, then at least one of the
two fundamental assumptions of the theory would have been
disproved. Let us now examine what general results the latter
theory has hitherto evinced.

Page 55
XV
GENERAL RESULTS OF THE THEORY
It is clear from our previous considerations that the (special)
theory of relativity has grown out of electrodynamics and op￾tics. In these fields it has not appreciably altered the predic￾tions of theory, but it has considerably simplified the theoretical
structure, i.e. the derivation of laws, and—what is incompara￾bly more important—it has considerably reduced the number of
independent hypotheses forming the basis of theory. The special
theory of relativity has rendered the Maxwell-Lorentz theory so
plausible, that the latter would have been generally accepted by
physicists even if experiment had decided less unequivocally in
its favour.
Classical mechanics required to be modified before it could
come into line with the demands of the special theory of relativ￾ity. For the main part, however, this modification affects only
the laws for rapid motions, in which the velocities of matter v
are not very small as compared with the velocity of light. We
have experience of such rapid motions only in the case of elec￾trons and ions; for other motions the variations from the laws of
classical mechanics are too small to make themselves evident in
practice. We shall not consider the motion of stars until we come
to speak of the general theory of relativity. In accordance with
the theory of relativity the kinetic energy of a material point of
mass m is no longer given by the well-known expression
m
v
2
2
,
42

Page 56
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 43
but by the expression
mc2
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
.
This expression approaches infinity as the velocity v approaches
the velocity of light c. The velocity must therefore always remain
less than c, however great may be the energies used to produce
the acceleration. If we develop the expression for the kinetic
energy in the form of a series, we obtain
mc2 + m
v
2
2
+
3
8
m
v
4
c
2
+ . . . .
When v
2
c
2
is small compared with unity, the third of these
terms is always small in comparison with the second, which last
is alone considered in classical mechanics. The first term mc2
does not contain the velocity, and requires no consideration if
we are only dealing with the question as to how the energy of
a point-mass depends on the velocity. We shall speak of its
essential significance later.
The most important result of a general character to which the
special theory of relativity has led is concerned with the concep￾tion of mass. Before the advent of relativity, physics recognised
two conservation laws of fundamental importance, namely, the
law of the conservation of energy and the law of the conserva￾tion of mass; these two fundamental laws appeared to be quite
independent of each other. By means of the theory of relativity
they have been united into one law. We shall now briefly con￾sider how this unification came about, and what meaning is to
be attached to it.

Page 57
RELATIVITY 44
The principle of relativity requires that the law of the con￾servation of energy should hold not only with reference to a co￾ordinate system K, but also with respect to every co-ordinate
system K′ which is in a state of uniform motion of translation
relative to K, or, briefly, relative to every “Galileian” system
of co-ordinates. In contrast to classical mechanics, the Lorentz
transformation is the deciding factor in the transition from one
such system to another.
By means of comparatively simple considerations we are led
to draw the following conclusion from these premises, in conjunc￾tion with the fundamental equations of the electrodynamics of
Maxwell: A body moving with the velocity v, which absorbs1 an
amount of energy E0 in the form of radiation without suffering
an alteration in velocity in the process, has, as a consequence,
its energy increased by an amount
r
E0
1 −
v
2
c
2
.
In consideration of the expression given above for the kinetic
energy of the body, the required energy of the body comes out
to be

m +
E0
c
2

c
2
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
.
Thus the body has the same energy as a body of mass
1E0 is the energy taken up, as judged from a co-ordinate system moving
with the body.

Page 58
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 45

m +
E0
c
2

moving with the velocity v. Hence we can say: If a
body takes up an amount of energy E0, then its inertial mass
increases by an amount E0
c
2
; the inertial mass of a body is not
a constant, but varies according to the change in the energy
of the body. The inertial mass of a system of bodies can even
be regarded as a measure of its energy. The law of the conser￾vation of the mass of a system becomes identical with the law
of the conservation of energy, and is only valid provided that
the system neither takes up nor sends out energy. Writing the
expression for the energy in the form
mc
r
2 + E0
1 −
v
2
c
2
,
we see that the term mc2
, which has hitherto attracted our at￾tention, is nothing else than the energy possessed by the body1
before it absorbed the energy E0.
A direct comparison of this relation with experiment is not
possible at the present time, owing to the fact that the changes
in energy E0 to which we can subject a system are not large
enough to make themselves perceptible as a change in the in￾ertial mass of the system. E0
c
2
is too small in comparison with
the mass m, which was present before the alteration of the en￾ergy. It is owing to this circumstance that classical mechanics
was able to establish successfully the conservation of mass as a
law of independent validity.
1As judged from a co-ordinate system moving with the body.

Page 59
RELATIVITY 46
Let me add a final remark of a fundamental nature. The suc￾cess of the Faraday-Maxwell interpretation of electromagnetic
action at a distance resulted in physicists becoming convinced
that there are no such things as instantaneous actions at a dis￾tance (not involving an intermediary medium) of the type of
Newton’s law of gravitation. According to the theory of relativ￾ity, action at a distance with the velocity of light always takes
the place of instantaneous action at a distance or of action at a
distance with an infinite velocity of transmission. This is con￾nected with the fact that the velocity c plays a fundamental rˆole
in this theory. In Part II we shall see in what way this result
becomes modified in the general theory of relativity.

Page 60
XVI
EXPERIENCE AND THE SPECIAL THEORY OF
RELATIVITY
To what extent is the special theory of relativity supported by
experience? This question is not easily answered for the reason
already mentioned in connection with the fundamental experi￾ment of Fizeau. The special theory of relativity has crystallised
out from the Maxwell-Lorentz theory of electromagnetic phe￾nomena. Thus all facts of experience which support the electro￾magnetic theory also support the theory of relativity. As being of
particular importance, I mention here the fact that the theory of
relativity enables us to predict the effects produced on the light
reaching us from the fixed stars. These results are obtained in
an exceedingly simple manner, and the effects indicated, which
are due to the relative motion of the earth with reference to
those fixed stars, are found to be in accord with experience. We
refer to the yearly movement of the apparent position of the
fixed stars resulting from the motion of the earth round the sun
(aberration), and to the influence of the radial components of
the relative motions of the fixed stars with respect to the earth
on the colour of the light reaching us from them. The latter
effect manifests itself in a slight displacement of the spectral
lines of the light transmitted to us from a fixed star, as com￾pared with the position of the same spectral lines when they
are produced by a terrestrial source of light (Doppler principle).
The experimental arguments in favour of the Maxwell-Lorentz
theory, which are at the same time arguments in favour of the
theory of relativity, are too numerous to be set forth here. In
47

Page 61
RELATIVITY 48
reality they limit the theoretical possibilities to such an extent,
that no other theory than that of Maxwell and Lorentz has been
able to hold its own when tested by experience.
But there are two classes of experimental facts hitherto ob￾tained which can be represented in the Maxwell-Lorentz the￾ory only by the introduction of an auxiliary hypothesis, which
in itself—i.e. without making use of the theory of relativity—
appears extraneous.
It is known that cathode rays and the so-called β-rays emit￾ted by radioactive substances consist of negatively electrified
particles (electrons) of very small inertia and large velocity. By
examining the deflection of these rays under the influence of
electric and magnetic fields, we can study the law of motion of
these particles very exactly.
In the theoretical treatment of these electrons, we are faced
with the difficulty that electrodynamic theory of itself is unable
to give an account of their nature. For since electrical masses
of one sign repel each other, the negative electrical masses con￾stituting the electron would necessarily be scattered under the
influence of their mutual repulsions, unless there are forces of
another kind operating between them, the nature of which has
hitherto remained obscure to us.1
If we now assume that the
relative distances between the electrical masses constituting the
electron remain unchanged during the motion of the electron
(rigid connection in the sense of classical mechanics), we arrive
at a law of motion of the electron which does not agree with ex￾perience. Guided by purely formal points of view, H. A. Lorentz
1The general theory of relativity renders it likely that the electrical
masses of an electron are held together by gravitational forces.

Page 62
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 49
was the first to introduce the hypothesis that the particles con￾stituting the electron experience a contraction in the direction of
motion in consequence of that motion, the amount of this con￾traction being proportional to the expression r
1 −
v
2
c
2
. This hy￾pothesis, which is not justifiable by any electrodynamical facts,
supplies us then with that particular law of motion which has
been confirmed with great precision in recent years.
The theory of relativity leads to the same law of motion,
without requiring any special hypothesis whatsoever as to the
structure and the behaviour of the electron. We arrived at a
similar conclusion in Section XIII in connection with the exper￾iment of Fizeau, the result of which is foretold by the theory of
relativity without the necessity of drawing on hypotheses as to
the physical nature of the liquid.
The second class of facts to which we have alluded has ref￾erence to the question whether or not the motion of the earth
in space can be made perceptible in terrestrial experiments. We
have already remarked in Section V that all attempts of this na￾ture led to a negative result. Before the theory of relativity was
put forward, it was difficult to become reconciled to this negative
result, for reasons now to be discussed. The inherited prejudices
about time and space did not allow any doubt to arise as to
the prime importance of the Galilei transformation for changing
over from one body of reference to another. Now assuming that
the Maxwell-Lorentz equations hold for a reference-body K, we
then find that they do not hold for a reference-body K′ moving
uniformly with respect to K, if we assume that the relations
of the Galileian transformation exist between the co-ordinates
of K and K′
. It thus appears that of all Galileian co-ordinate

Page 63
RELATIVITY 50
systems one (K) corresponding to a particular state of motion
is physically unique. This result was interpreted physically by
regarding K as at rest with respect to a hypothetical æther of
space. On the other hand, all co-ordinate systems K′ moving
relatively to K were to be regarded as in motion with respect to
the æther. To this motion of K′ against the æther (“æther-drift”
relative to K′
) were assigned the more complicated laws which
were supposed to hold relative to K′
. Strictly speaking, such an
æther-drift ought also to be assumed relative to the earth, and
for a long time the efforts of physicists were devoted to attempts
to detect the existence of an æther-drift at the earth’s surface.
In one of the most notable of these attempts Michelson de￾vised a method which appears as though it must be decisive.
Imagine two mirrors so arranged on a rigid body that the re￾flecting surfaces face each other. A ray of light requires a per￾fectly definite time T to pass from one mirror to the other and
back again, if the whole system be at rest with respect to the
æther. It is found by calculation, however, that a slightly dif￾ferent time T
′
is required for this process, if the body, together
with the mirrors, be moving relatively to the æther. And yet
another point: it is shown by calculation that for a given ve￾locity v with reference to the æther, this time T
′
is different
when the body is moving perpendicularly to the planes of the
mirrors from that resulting when the motion is parallel to these
planes. Although the estimated difference between these two
times is exceedingly small, Michelson and Morley performed an
experiment involving interference in which this difference should
have been clearly detectable. But the experiment gave a neg￾ative result—a fact very perplexing to physicists. Lorentz and
FitzGerald rescued the theory from this difficulty by assuming

Page 64
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 51
that the motion of the body relative to the æther produces a
contraction of the body in the direction of motion, the amount
of contraction being just sufficient to compensate for the differ￾ence in time mentioned above. Comparison with the discussion
in Section XII shows that also from the standpoint of the the￾ory of relativity this solution of the difficulty was the right one.
But on the basis of the theory of relativity the method of inter￾pretation is incomparably more satisfactory. According to this
theory there is no such thing as a “specially favoured” (unique)
co-ordinate system to occasion the introduction of the æther￾idea, and hence there can be no æther-drift, nor any experiment
with which to demonstrate it. Here the contraction of moving
bodies follows from the two fundamental principles of the the￾ory without the introduction of particular hypotheses; and as
the prime factor involved in this contraction we find, not the
motion in itself, to which we cannot attach any meaning, but
the motion with respect to the body of reference chosen in the
particular case in point. Thus for a co-ordinate system moving
with the earth the mirror system of Michelson and Morley is not
shortened, but it is shortened for a co-ordinate system which is
at rest relatively to the sun.

Page 65
XVII
MINKOWSKI’S FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE
The non-mathematician is seized by a mysterious shuddering
when he hears of “four-dimensional” things, by a feeling not
unlike that awakened by thoughts of the occult. And yet there
is no more common-place statement than that the world in which
we live is a four-dimensional space-time continuum.
Space is a three-dimensional continuum. By this we mean
that it is possible to describe the position of a point (at rest) by
means of three numbers (co-ordinates) x, y, z, and that there is
an indefinite number of points in the neighbourhood of this one,
the position of which can be described by co-ordinates such as
x1, y1, z1, which may be as near as we choose to the respective
values of the co-ordinates x, y, z of the first point. In virtue
of the latter property we speak of a “continuum,” and owing to
the fact that there are three co-ordinates we speak of it as being
“three-dimensional.”
Similarly, the world of physical phenomena which was briefly
called “world” by Minkowski is naturally four-dimensional in the
space-time sense. For it is composed of individual events, each
of which is described by four numbers, namely, three space co￾ordinates x, y, z and a time co-ordinate, the time-value t. The
“world” is in this sense also a continuum; for to every event
there are as many “neighbouring” events (realised or at least
thinkable) as we care to choose, the co-ordinates x1, y1, z1, t1 of
which differ by an indefinitely small amount from those of the
event x, y, z, t originally considered. That we have not been ac￾customed to regard the world in this sense as a four-dimensional
52

Page 66
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 53
continuum is due to the fact that in physics, before the advent
of the theory of relativity, time played a different and more in￾dependent rˆole, as compared with the space co-ordinates. It is
for this reason that we have been in the habit of treating time
as an independent continuum. As a matter of fact, according
to classical mechanics, time is absolute, i.e. it is independent
of the position and the condition of motion of the system of
co-ordinates. We see this expressed in the last equation of the
Galileian transformation (t
′ = t).
The four-dimensional mode of consideration of the “world” is
natural on the theory of relativity, since according to this theory
time is robbed of its independence. This is shown by the fourth
equation of the Lorentz transformation:
t
′ =
t −
v
c
2
x
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
.
Moreover, according to this equation the time difference ∆t
′ of
two events with respect to K′ does not in general vanish, even
when the time difference ∆t of the same events with reference
to K vanishes. Pure “space-distance” of two events with respect
to K results in “time-distance” of the same events with respect
to K′
. But the discovery of Minkowski, which was of importance
for the formal development of the theory of relativity, does not
lie here. It is to be found rather in the fact of his recognition
that the four-dimensional space-time continuum of the theory
of relativity, in its most essential formal properties, shows a
pronounced relationship to the three-dimensional continuum of

Page 67
RELATIVITY 54
Euclidean geometrical space.1
In order to give due prominence
to this relationship, however, we must replace the usual time co￾ordinate t by an imaginary magnitude √
−1·ct proportional to it.
Under these conditions, the natural laws satisfying the demands
of the (special) theory of relativity assume mathematical forms,
in which the time co-ordinate plays exactly the same rˆole as
the three space co-ordinates. Formally, these four co-ordinates
correspond exactly to the three space co-ordinates in Euclidean
geometry. It must be clear even to the non-mathematician that,
as a consequence of this purely formal addition to our knowledge,
the theory perforce gained clearness in no mean measure.
These inadequate remarks can give the reader only a vague
notion of the important idea contributed by Minkowski. With￾out it the general theory of relativity, of which the fundamental
ideas are developed in the following pages, would perhaps have
got no farther than its long clothes. Minkowski’s work is doubt￾less difficult of access to anyone inexperienced in mathematics,
but since it is not necessary to have a very exact grasp of this
work in order to understand the fundamental ideas of either the
special or the general theory of relativity, I shall at present leave
it here, and shall revert to it only towards the end of Part II.
1Cf. the somewhat more detailed discussion in Appendix II.

Page 68
PART II
THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
XVIII
SPECIAL AND GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF
RELATIVITY
The basal principle, which was the pivot of all our previous
considerations, was the special principle of relativity, i.e. the
principle of the physical relativity of all uniform motion. Let us
once more analyse its meaning carefully.
It was at all times clear that, from the point of view of the
idea it conveys to us, every motion must only be considered as a
relative motion. Returning to the illustration we have frequently
used of the embankment and the railway carriage, we can express
the fact of the motion here taking place in the following two
forms, both of which are equally justifiable:
(a) The carriage is in motion relative to the embankment.
(b) The embankment is in motion relative to the carriage.
In (a) the embankment, in (b) the carriage, serves as the
body of reference in our statement of the motion taking place.
If it is simply a question of detecting or of describing the motion
involved, it is in principle immaterial to what reference-body we
refer the motion. As already mentioned, this is self-evident,
but it must not be confused with the much more comprehen￾sive statement called “the principle of relativity,” which we have
taken as the basis of our investigations.
55

Page 69
RELATIVITY 56
The principle we have made use of not only maintains that
we may equally well choose the carriage or the embankment as
our reference-body for the description of any event (for this, too,
is self-evident). Our principle rather asserts what follows: If we
formulate the general laws of nature as they are obtained from
experience, by making use of
(a) the embankment as reference-body,
(b) the railway carriage as reference-body,
then these general laws of nature (e.g. the laws of mechanics or
the law of the propagation of light in vacuo) have exactly the
same form in both cases. This can also be expressed as follows:
For the physical description of natural processes, neither of the
reference-bodies K, K′
is unique (lit. “specially marked out”)
as compared with the other. Unlike the first, this latter state￾ment need not of necessity hold a priori; it is not contained in
the conceptions of “motion” and “reference-body” and derivable
from them; only experience can decide as to its correctness or
incorrectness.
Up to the present, however, we have by no means maintained
the equivalence of all bodies of reference K in connection with
the formulation of natural laws. Our course was more on the
following lines. In the first place, we started out from the as￾sumption that there exists a reference-body K, whose condition
of motion is such that the Galileian law holds with respect to
it: A particle left to itself and sufficiently far removed from all
other particles moves uniformly in a straight line. With refer￾ence to K (Galileian reference-body) the laws of nature were to
be as simple as possible. But in addition to K, all bodies of
reference K′
should be given preference in this sense, and they

Page 70
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 57
should be exactly equivalent to K for the formulation of natu￾ral laws, provided that they are in a state of uniform rectilinear
and non-rotary motion with respect to K; all these bodies of
reference are to be regarded as Galileian reference-bodies. The
validity of the principle of relativity was assumed only for these
reference-bodies, but not for others (e.g. those possessing mo￾tion of a different kind). In this sense we speak of the special
principle of relativity, or special theory of relativity.
In contrast to this we wish to understand by the “general
principle of relativity” the following statement: All bodies of
reference K, K′
, etc., are equivalent for the description of natural
phenomena (formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever
may be their state of motion. But before proceeding farther, it
ought to be pointed out that this formulation must be replaced
later by a more abstract one, for reasons which will become
evident at a later stage.
Since the introduction of the special principle of relativity has
been justified, every intellect which strives after generalisation
must feel the temptation to venture the step towards the general
principle of relativity. But a simple and apparently quite reliable
consideration seems to suggest that, for the present at any rate,
there is little hope of success in such an attempt. Let us imagine
ourselves transferred to our old friend the railway carriage, which
is travelling at a uniform rate. As long as it is moving uniformly,
the occupant of the carriage is not sensible of its motion, and
it is for this reason that he can without reluctance interpret the
facts of the case as indicating that the carriage is at rest but
the embankment in motion. Moreover, according to the special
principle of relativity, this interpretation is quite justified also
from a physical point of view.

Page 71
RELATIVITY 58
If the motion of the carriage is now changed into a non￾uniform motion, as for instance by a powerful application of
the brakes, then the occupant of the carriage experiences a cor￾respondingly powerful jerk forwards. The retarded motion is
manifested in the mechanical behaviour of bodies relative to the
person in the railway carriage. The mechanical behaviour is dif￾ferent from that of the case previously considered, and for this
reason it would appear to be impossible that the same mechan￾ical laws hold relatively to the non-uniformly moving carriage,
as hold with reference to the carriage when at rest or in uni￾form motion. At all events it is clear that the Galileian law
does not hold with respect to the non-uniformly moving car￾riage. Because of this, we feel compelled at the present juncture
to grant a kind of absolute physical reality to non-uniform mo￾tion, in opposition to the general principle of relativity. But in
what follows we shall soon see that this conclusion cannot be
maintained.

Page 72
XIX
THE GRAVITATIONAL FIELD
“If we pick up a stone and then let it go, why does it fall to
the ground?” The usual answer to this question is: “Because
it is attracted by the earth.” Modern physics formulates the
answer rather differently for the following reason. As a result
of the more careful study of electromagnetic phenomena, we
have come to regard action at a distance as a process impossi￾ble without the intervention of some intermediary medium. If,
for instance, a magnet attracts a piece of iron, we cannot be
content to regard this as meaning that the magnet acts directly
on the iron through the intermediate empty space, but we are
constrained to imagine—after the manner of Faraday—that the
magnet always calls into being something physically real in the
space around it, that something being what we call a “magnetic
field.” In its turn this magnetic field operates on the piece of
iron, so that the latter strives to move towards the magnet. We
shall not discuss here the justification for this incidental concep￾tion, which is indeed a somewhat arbitrary one. We shall only
mention that with its aid electromagnetic phenomena can be
theoretically represented much more satisfactorily than without
it, and this applies particularly to the transmission of electro￾magnetic waves. The effects of gravitation also are regarded in
an analogous manner.
The action of the earth on the stone takes place indirectly.
The earth produces in its surroundings a gravitational field,
which acts on the stone and produces its motion of fall. As we
know from experience, the intensity of the action on a body di￾59

Page 73
RELATIVITY 60
minishes according to a quite definite law, as we proceed farther
and farther away from the earth. From our point of view this
means: The law governing the properties of the gravitational
field in space must be a perfectly definite one, in order correctly
to represent the diminution of gravitational action with the dis￾tance from operative bodies. It is something like this: The body
(e.g. the earth) produces a field in its immediate neighbourhood
directly; the intensity and direction of the field at points far￾ther removed from the body are thence determined by the law
which governs the properties in space of the gravitational fields
themselves.
In contrast to electric and magnetic fields, the gravitational
field exhibits a most remarkable property, which is of fundamen￾tal importance for what follows. Bodies which are moving under
the sole influence of a gravitational field receive an acceleration,
which does not in the least depend either on the material or on
the physical state of the body. For instance, a piece of lead and
a piece of wood fall in exactly the same manner in a gravita￾tional field (in vacuo), when they start off from rest or with
the same initial velocity. This law, which holds most accurately,
can be expressed in a different form in the light of the following
consideration.
According to Newton’s law of motion, we have
(Force) = (inertial mass) × (acceleration),
where the “inertial mass” is a characteristic constant of the ac￾celerated body. If now gravitation is the cause of the accelera-

Page 74
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 61
tion, we then have
(Force) = (gravitational mass)
× (intensity of the gravitational field),
where the “gravitational mass” is likewise a characteristic con￾stant for the body. From these two relations follows:
(acceleration) = (gravitational mass)
(inertial mass)
× (intensity of the gravitational field).
If now, as we find from experience, the acceleration is to be
independent of the nature and the condition of the body and
always the same for a given gravitational field, then the ratio of
the gravitational to the inertial mass must likewise be the same
for all bodies. By a suitable choice of units we can thus make
this ratio equal to unity. We then have the following law: The
gravitational mass of a body is equal to its inertial mass.
It is true that this important law had hitherto been recorded
in mechanics, but it had not been interpreted. A satisfactory
interpretation can be obtained only if we recognise the following
fact: The same quality of a body manifests itself according to
circumstances as “inertia” or as “weight” (lit. “heaviness”). In
the following section we shall show to what extent this is actually
the case, and how this question is connected with the general
postulate of relativity.

Page 75
XX
THE EQUALITY OF INERTIAL AND
GRAVITATIONAL MASS AS AN ARGUMENT FOR
THE GENERAL POSTULATE OF RELATIVITY
We imagine a large portion of empty space, so far removed
from stars and other appreciable masses, that we have before us
approximately the conditions required by the fundamental law
of Galilei. It is then possible to choose a Galileian reference￾body for this part of space (world), relative to which points at
rest remain at rest and points in motion continue permanently in
uniform rectilinear motion. As reference-body let us imagine a
spacious chest resembling a room with an observer inside who is
equipped with apparatus. Gravitation naturally does not exist
for this observer. He must fasten himself with strings to the
floor, otherwise the slightest impact against the floor will cause
him to rise slowly towards the ceiling of the room.
To the middle of the lid of the chest is fixed externally a
hook with rope attached, and now a “being” (what kind of a
being is immaterial to us) begins pulling at this with a constant
force. The chest together with the observer then begin to move
“upwards” with a uniformly accelerated motion. In course of
time their velocity will reach unheard-of values—provided that
we are viewing all this from another reference-body which is not
being pulled with a rope.
But how does the man in the chest regard the process? The
acceleration of the chest will be transmitted to him by the re￾action of the floor of the chest. He must therefore take up this
pressure by means of his legs if he does not wish to be laid out
62

Page 76
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 63
full length on the floor. He is then standing in the chest in ex￾actly the same way as anyone stands in a room of a house on
our earth. If he release a body which he previously had in his
hand, the acceleration of the chest will no longer be transmitted
to this body, and for this reason the body will approach the floor
of the chest with an accelerated relative motion. The observer
will further convince himself that the acceleration of the body
towards the floor of the chest is always of the same magnitude,
whatever kind of body he may happen to use for the experiment.
Relying on his knowledge of the gravitational field (as it was
discussed in the preceding section), the man in the chest will
thus come to the conclusion that he and the chest are in a grav￾itational field which is constant with regard to time. Of course
he will be puzzled for a moment as to why the chest does not
fall, in this gravitational field. Just then, however, he discovers
the hook in the middle of the lid of the chest and the rope which
is attached to it, and he consequently comes to the conclusion
that the chest is suspended at rest in the gravitational field.
Ought we to smile at the man and say that he errs in his con￾clusion? I do not believe we ought to if we wish to remain con￾sistent; we must rather admit that his mode of grasping the situ￾ation violates neither reason nor known mechanical laws. Even
though it is being accelerated with respect to the “Galileian
space” first considered, we can nevertheless regard the chest as
being at rest. We have thus good grounds for extending the
principle of relativity to include bodies of reference which are
accelerated with respect to each other, and as a result we have
gained a powerful argument for a generalised postulate of rela￾tivity.
We must note carefully that the possibility of this mode of

Page 77
RELATIVITY 64
interpretation rests on the fundamental property of the gravita￾tional field of giving all bodies the same acceleration, or, what
comes to the same thing, on the law of the equality of inertial
and gravitational mass. If this natural law did not exist, the
man in the accelerated chest would not be able to interpret the
behaviour of the bodies around him on the supposition of a grav￾itational field, and he would not be justified on the grounds of
experience in supposing his reference-body to be “at rest.”
Suppose that the man in the chest fixes a rope to the inner
side of the lid, and that he attaches a body to the free end of
the rope. The result of this will be to stretch the rope so that
it will hang “vertically” downwards. If we ask for an opinion
of the cause of tension in the rope, the man in the chest will
say: “The suspended body experiences a downward force in the
gravitational field, and this is neutralised by the tension of the
rope; what determines the magnitude of the tension of the rope
is the gravitational mass of the suspended body.” On the other
hand, an observer who is poised freely in space will interpret
the condition of things thus: “The rope must perforce take part
in the accelerated motion of the chest, and it transmits this
motion to the body attached to it. The tension of the rope is
just large enough to effect the acceleration of the body. That
which determines the magnitude of the tension of the rope is
the inertial mass of the body.” Guided by this example, we
see that our extension of the principle of relativity implies the
necessity of the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational
mass. Thus we have obtained a physical interpretation of this
law.
From our consideration of the accelerated chest we see that
a general theory of relativity must yield important results on

Page 78
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 65
the laws of gravitation. In point of fact, the systematic pursuit
of the general idea of relativity has supplied the laws satisfied
by the gravitational field. Before proceeding farther, however,
I must warn the reader against a misconception suggested by
these considerations. A gravitational field exists for the man
in the chest, despite the fact that there was no such field for
the co-ordinate system first chosen. Now we might easily sup￾pose that the existence of a gravitational field is always only
an apparent one. We might also think that, regardless of the
kind of gravitational field which may be present, we could al￾ways choose another reference-body such that no gravitational
field exists with reference to it. This is by no means true for all
gravitational fields, but only for those of quite special form. It
is, for instance, impossible to choose a body of reference such
that, as judged from it, the gravitational field of the earth (in
its entirety) vanishes.
We can now appreciate why that argument is not convincing,
which we brought forward against the general principle of rela￾tivity at the end of Section XVIII. It is certainly true that the
observer in the railway carriage experiences a jerk forwards as a
result of the application of the brake, and that he recognises in
this the non-uniformity of motion (retardation) of the carriage.
But he is compelled by nobody to refer this jerk to a “real” ac￾celeration (retardation) of the carriage. He might also interpret
his experience thus: “My body of reference (the carriage) re￾mains permanently at rest. With reference to it, however, there
exists (during the period of application of the brakes) a grav￾itational field which is directed forwards and which is variable
with respect to time. Under the influence of this field, the em￾bankment together with the earth moves non-uniformly in such

Page 79
RELATIVITY 66
a manner that their original velocity in the backwards direction
is continuously reduced.”

Page 80
XXI
IN WHAT RESPECTS ARE THE FOUNDATIONS
OF CLASSICAL MECHANICS AND OF THE
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
UNSATISFACTORY?
We have already stated several times that classical mechanics
starts out from the following law: Material particles sufficiently
far removed from other material particles continue to move uni￾formly in a straight line or continue in a state of rest. We have
also repeatedly emphasised that this fundamental law can only
be valid for bodies of reference K which possess certain unique
states of motion, and which are in uniform translational motion
relative to each other. Relative to other reference-bodies K the
law is not valid. Both in classical mechanics and in the special
theory of relativity we therefore differentiate between reference￾bodies K relative to which the recognised “laws of nature” can
be said to hold, and reference-bodies K relative to which these
laws do not hold.
But no person whose mode of thought is logical can rest
satisfied with this condition of things. He asks: “How does it
come that certain reference-bodies (or their states of motion)
are given priority over other reference-bodies (or their states of
motion)? What is the reason for this preference? ” In order to
show clearly what I mean by this question, I shall make use of
a comparison.
I am standing in front of a gas range. Standing alongside
of each other on the range are two pans so much alike that one
may be mistaken for the other. Both are half full of water. I
67

Page 81
RELATIVITY 68
notice that steam is being emitted continuously from the one
pan, but not from the other. I am surprised at this, even if
I have never seen either a gas range or a pan before. But if I
now notice a luminous something of bluish colour under the first
pan but not under the other, I cease to be astonished, even if I
have never before seen a gas flame. For I can only say that this
bluish something will cause the emission of the steam, or at least
possibly it may do so. If, however, I notice the bluish something
in neither case, and if I observe that the one continuously emits
steam whilst the other does not, then I shall remain astonished
and dissatisfied until I have discovered some circumstance to
which I can attribute the different behaviour of the two pans.
Analogously, I seek in vain for a real something in classi￾cal mechanics (or in the special theory of relativity) to which I
can attribute the different behaviour of bodies considered with
respect to the reference-systems K and K′
.
1 Newton saw this
objection and attempted to invalidate it, but without success.
But E. Mach recognised it most clearly of all, and because of this
objection he claimed that mechanics must be placed on a new
basis. It can only be got rid of by means of a physics which is
conformable to the general principle of relativity, since the equa￾tions of such a theory hold for every body of reference, whatever
may be its state of motion.
1The objection is of importance more especially when the state of motion
of the reference-body is of such a nature that it does not require any external
agency for its maintenance, e.g. in the case when the reference-body is
rotating uniformly.

Page 82
XXII
A FEW INFERENCES FROM THE GENERAL
PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY
The considerations of Section XX show that the general prin￾ciple of relativity puts us in a position to derive properties of the
gravitational field in a purely theoretical manner. Let us sup￾pose, for instance, that we know the space-time “course” for any
natural process whatsoever, as regards the manner in which it
takes place in the Galileian domain relative to a Galileian body
of reference K. By means of purely theoretical operations (i.e.
simply by calculation) we are then able to find how this known
natural process appears, as seen from a reference-body K′ which
is accelerated relatively to K. But since a gravitational field
exists with respect to this new body of reference K′
, our con￾sideration also teaches us how the gravitational field influences
the process studied.
For example, we learn that a body which is in a state of
uniform rectilinear motion with respect to K (in accordance
with the law of Galilei) is executing an accelerated and in gen￾eral curvilinear motion with respect to the accelerated reference￾body K′
(chest). This acceleration or curvature corresponds to
the influence on the moving body of the gravitational field pre￾vailing relatively to K′
. It is known that a gravitational field
influences the movement of bodies in this way, so that our con￾sideration supplies us with nothing essentially new.
However, we obtain a new result of fundamental importance
when we carry out the analogous consideration for a ray of light.
With respect to the Galileian reference-body K, such a ray of
69

Page 83
RELATIVITY 70
light is transmitted rectilinearly with the velocity c. It can eas￾ily be shown that the path of the same ray of light is no longer
a straight line when we consider it with reference to the acceler￾ated chest (reference-body K′
). From this we conclude, that, in
general, rays of light are propagated curvilinearly in gravitational
fields. In two respects this result is of great importance.
In the first place, it can be compared with the reality. Al￾though a detailed examination of the question shows that the
curvature of light rays required by the general theory of relativ￾ity is only exceedingly small for the gravitational fields at our
disposal in practice, its estimated magnitude for light rays pass￾ing the sun at grazing incidence is nevertheless 1.7 seconds of
arc. This ought to manifest itself in the following way. As seen
from the earth, certain fixed stars appear to be in the neigh￾bourhood of the sun, and are thus capable of observation during
a total eclipse of the sun. At such times, these stars ought to
appear to be displaced outwards from the sun by an amount
indicated above, as compared with their apparent position in
the sky when the sun is situated at another part of the heavens.
The examination of the correctness or otherwise of this deduc￾tion is a problem of the greatest importance, the early solution
of which is to be expected of astronomers.1
In the second place our result shows that, according to the
general theory of relativity, the law of the constancy of the ve￾locity of light in vacuo, which constitutes one of the two fun￾damental assumptions in the special theory of relativity and to
1By means of the star photographs of two expeditions equipped by a
Joint Committee of the Royal and Royal Astronomical Societies, the exis￾tence of the deflection of light demanded by theory was confirmed during
the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. (Cf. Appendix III.)

Page 84
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 71
which we have already frequently referred, cannot claim any un￾limited validity. A curvature of rays of light can only take place
when the velocity of propagation of light varies with position.
Now we might think that as a consequence of this, the special
theory of relativity and with it the whole theory of relativity
would be laid in the dust. But in reality this is not the case. We
can only conclude that the special theory of relativity cannot
claim an unlimited domain of validity; its results hold only so
long as we are able to disregard the influences of gravitational
fields on the phenomena (e.g. of light).
Since it has often been contended by opponents of the theory
of relativity that the special theory of relativity is overthrown by
the general theory of relativity, it is perhaps advisable to make
the facts of the case clearer by means of an appropriate com￾parison. Before the development of electrodynamics the laws of
electrostatics were looked upon as the laws of electricity. At the
present time we know that electric fields can be derived correctly
from electrostatic considerations only for the case, which is never
strictly realised, in which the electrical masses are quite at rest
relatively to each other, and to the co-ordinate system. Should
we be justified in saying that for this reason electrostatics is
overthrown by the field-equations of Maxwell in electrodynam￾ics? Not in the least. Electrostatics is contained in electrody￾namics as a limiting case; the laws of the latter lead directly to
those of the former for the case in which the fields are invariable
with regard to time. No fairer destiny could be allotted to any
physical theory, than that it should of itself point out the way
to the introduction of a more comprehensive theory, in which it
lives on as a limiting case.
In the example of the transmission of light just dealt with,

Page 85
RELATIVITY 72
we have seen that the general theory of relativity enables us
to derive theoretically the influence of a gravitational field on
the course of natural processes, the laws of which are already
known when a gravitational field is absent. But the most at￾tractive problem, to the solution of which the general theory of
relativity supplies the key, concerns the investigation of the laws
satisfied by the gravitational field itself. Let us consider this for
a moment.
We are acquainted with space-time domains which behave
(approximately) in a “Galileian” fashion under suitable choice
of reference-body, i.e. domains in which gravitational fields are
absent. If we now refer such a domain to a reference-body K′
possessing any kind of motion, then relative to K′
there exists
a gravitational field which is variable with respect to space and
time.1 The character of this field will of course depend on the
motion chosen for K′
. According to the general theory of rela￾tivity, the general law oi the gravitational field must be satisfied
for all gravitational fields obtainable in this way. Even though
by no means all gravitational fields can be produced in this way,
yet we may entertain the hope that the general law of gravita￾tion will be derivable from such gravitational fields of a special
kind. This hope has been realised in the most beautiful manner.
But between the clear vision of this goal and its actual realisa￾tion it was necessary to surmount a serious difficulty, and as
this lies deep at the root of things, I dare not withhold it from
the reader. We require to extend our ideas of the space-time
continuum still farther.
1This follows from a generalisation of the discussion in Section XX.

Page 86
XXIII
BEHAVIOUR OF CLOCKS AND
MEASURING-RODS ON A ROTATING BODY OF
REFERENCE
Hitherto I have purposely refrained from speaking about
the physical interpretation of space- and time-data in the case
of the general theory of relativity. As a consequence, I am guilty
of a certain slovenliness of treatment, which, as we know from
the special theory of relativity, is far from being unimportant
and pardonable. It is now high time that we remedy this defect;
but I would mention at the outset, that this matter lays no small
claims on the patience and on the power of abstraction of the
reader.
We start off again from quite special cases, which we have
frequently used before. Let us consider a space-time domain in
which no gravitational field exists relative to a reference-body K
whose state of motion has been suitably chosen. K is then
a Galileian reference-body as regards the domain considered,
and the results of the special theory of relativity hold relative
to K. Let us suppose the same domain referred to a second
body of reference K′
, which is rotating uniformly with respect
to K. In order to fix our ideas, we shall imagine K′
to be in the
form of a plane circular disc, which rotates uniformly in its own
plane about its centre. An observer who is sitting eccentrically
on the disc K′
is sensible of a force which acts outwards in a
radial direction, and which would be interpreted as an effect of
inertia (centrifugal force) by an observer who was at rest with
respect to the original reference-body K. But the observer on
73

Page 87
RELATIVITY 74
the disc may regard his disc as a reference-body which is “at
rest”; on the basis of the general principle of relativity he is
justified in doing this. The force acting on himself, and in fact
on all other bodies which are at rest relative to the disc, he
regards as the effect of a gravitational field. Nevertheless, the
space-distribution of this gravitational field is of a kind that
would not be possible on Newton’s theory of gravitation.1 But
since the observer believes in the general theory of relativity, this
does not disturb him; he is quite in the right when he believes
that a general law of gravitation can be formulated—a law which
not only explains the motion of the stars correctly, but also the
field of force experienced by himself.
The observer performs experiments on his circular disc with
clocks and measuring-rods. In doing so, it is his intention to
arrive at exact definitions for the signification of time- and space￾data with reference to the circular disc K′
, these definitions
being based on his observations. What will be his experience in
this enterprise?
To start with, he places one of two identically constructed
clocks at the centre of the circular disc, and the other on the
edge of the disc, so that they are at rest relative to it. We
now ask ourselves whether both clocks go at the same rate from
the standpoint of the non-rotating Galileian reference-body K.
As judged from this body, the clock at the centre of the disc
has no velocity, whereas the clock at the edge of the disc is in
motion relative to K in consequence of the rotation. According
to a result obtained in Section XII, it follows that the latter
1The field disappears at the centre of the disc and increases proportion￾ally to the distance from the centre as we proceed outwards.

Page 88
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 75
clock goes at a rate permanently slower than that of the clock
at the centre of the circular disc, i.e. as observed from K. It
is obvious that the same effect would be noted by an observer
whom we will imagine sitting alongside his clock at the centre
of the circular disc. Thus on our circular disc, or, to make the
case more general, in every gravitational field, a clock will go
more quickly or less quickly, according to the position in which
the clock is situated (at rest). For this reason it is not possible
to obtain a reasonable definition of time with the aid of clocks
which are arranged at rest with respect to the body of reference.
A similar difficulty presents itself when we attempt to apply our
earlier definition of simultaneity in such a case, but I do not
wish to go any farther into this question.
Moreover, at this stage the definition of the space co￾ordinates also presents insurmountable difficulties. If the ob￾server applies his standard measuring-rod (a rod which is short
as compared with the radius of the disc) tangentially to the
edge of the disc, then, as judged from the Galileian system,
the length of this rod will be less than 1, since, according to
Section XII, moving bodies suffer a shortening in the direction
of the motion. On the other hand, the measuring-rod will not
experience a shortening in length, as judged from K, if it is
applied to the disc in the direction of the radius. If, then, the
observer first measures the circumference of the disc with his
measuring-rod and then the diameter of the disc, on dividing
the one by the other, he will not obtain as quotient the familiar
number π = 3.14 . . . , but a larger number,1 whereas of course,
1Throughout this consideration we have to use the Galileian (non￾rotating) system K as reference-body, since we may only assume the validity

Page 89
RELATIVITY 76
for a disc which is at rest with respect to K, this operation
would yield π exactly. This proves that the propositions of
Euclidean geometry cannot hold exactly on the rotating disc,
nor in general in a gravitational field, at least if we attribute
the length 1 to the rod in all positions and in every orientation.
Hence the idea of a straight line also loses its meaning. We are
therefore not in a position to define exactly the co-ordinates
x, y, z relative to the disc by means of the method used in
discussing the special theory, and as long as the co-ordinates
and times of events have not been defined, we cannot assign an
exact meaning to the natural laws in which these occur.
Thus all our previous conclusions based on general relativity
would appear to be called in question. In reality we must make
a subtle detour in order to be able to apply the postulate of
general relativity exactly. I shall prepare the reader for this in
the following paragraphs.
of the results of the special theory of relativity relative to K (relative to K′
a gravitational field prevails).

Page 90
XXIV
EUCLIDEAN AND NON-EUCLIDEAN
CONTINUUM
The surface of a marble table is spread out in front of me.
I can get from any one point on this table to any other point
by passing continuously from one point to a “neighbouring” one,
and repeating this process a (large) number of times, or, in other
words, by going from point to point without executing “jumps.”
I am sure the reader will appreciate with sufficient clearness
what I mean here by “neighbouring” and by “jumps” (if he is
not too pedantic). We express this property of the surface by
describing the latter as a continuum.
Let us now imagine that a large number of little rods of equal
length have been made, their lengths being small compared with
the dimensions of the marble slab. When I say they are of
equal length, I mean that one can be laid on any other without
the ends overlapping. We next lay four of these little rods on
the marble slab so that they constitute a quadrilateral figure (a
square), the diagonals of which are equally long. To ensure the
equality of the diagonals, we make use of a little testing-rod. To
this square we add similar ones, each of which has one rod in
common with the first. We proceed in like manner with each of
these squares until finally the whole marble slab is laid out with
squares. The arrangement is such, that each side of a square
belongs to two squares and each corner to four squares.
It is a veritable wonder that we can carry out this business
without getting into the greatest difficulties. We only need to
think of the following. If at any moment three squares meet at
77

Page 91
RELATIVITY 78
a corner, then two sides of the fourth square are already laid,
and, as a consequence, the arrangement of the remaining two
sides of the square is already completely determined. But I
am now no longer able to adjust the quadrilateral so that its
diagonals may be equal. If they are equal of their own accord,
then this is an especial favour of the marble slab and of the little
rods, about which I can only be thankfully surprised. We must
needs experience many such surprises if the construction is to
be successful.
If everything has really gone smoothly, then I say that the
points of the marble slab constitute a Euclidean continuum with
respect to the little rod, which has been used as a “distance”
(line-interval). By choosing one corner of a square as “origin,” I
can characterise every other corner of a square with reference to
this origin by means of two numbers. I only need state how many
rods I must pass over when, starting from the origin, I proceed
towards the “right” and then “upwards,” in order to arrive at the
corner of the square under consideration. These two numbers are
then the “Cartesian co-ordinates” of this corner with reference
to the “Cartesian co-ordinate system” which is determined by
the arrangement of little rods.
By making use of the following modification of this abstract
experiment, we recognise that there must also be cases in which
the experiment would be unsuccessful. We shall suppose that
the rods “expand” by an amount proportional to the increase of
temperature. We heat the central part of the marble slab, but
not the periphery, in which case two of our little rods can still
be brought into coincidence at every position on the table. But
our construction of squares must necessarily come into disorder
during the heating, because the little rods on the central region

Page 92
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 79
of the table expand, whereas those on the outer part do not.
With reference to our little rods—defined as unit lengths—
the marble slab is no longer a Euclidean continuum, and we are
also no longer in the position of defining Cartesian co-ordinates
directly with their aid, since the above construction can no
longer be carried out. But since there are other things which
are not influenced in a similar manner to the little rods (or per￾haps not at all) by the temperature of the table, it is possible
quite naturally to maintain the point of view that the marble
slab is a “Euclidean continuum.” This can be done in a satis￾factory manner by making a more subtle stipulation about the
measurement or the comparison of lengths.
But if rods of every kind (i.e. of every material) were to
behave in the same way as regards the influence of temperature
when they are on the variably heated marble slab, and if we had
no other means of detecting the effect of temperature than the
geometrical behaviour of our rods in experiments analogous to
the one described above, then our best plan would be to assign
the distance one to two points on the slab, provided that the
ends of one of our rods could be made to coincide with these
two points; for how else should we define the distance without
our proceeding being in the highest measure grossly arbitrary?
The method of Cartesian co-ordinates must then be discarded,
and replaced by another which does not assume the validity of
Euclidean geometry for rigid bodies.1 The reader will notice
1Mathematicians have been confronted with our problem in the follow￾ing form. If we are given a surface (e.g. an ellipsoid) in Euclidean three￾dimensional space, then there exists for this surface a two-dimensional ge￾ometry, just as much as for a plane surface. Gauss undertook the task of
treating this two-dimensional geometry from first principles, without mak-

Page 93
RELATIVITY 80
that the situation depicted here corresponds to the one brought
about by the general postulate of relativity (Section XXIII).
ing use of the fact that the surface belongs to a Euclidean continuum of
three dimensions. If we imagine constructions to be made with rigid rods in
the surface (similar to that above with the marble slab), we should find that
different laws hold for these from those resulting on the basis of Euclidean
plane geometry. The surface is not a Euclidean continuum with respect to
the rods, and we cannot define Cartesian co-ordinates in the surface. Gauss
indicated the principles according to which we can treat the geometrical re￾lationships in the surface, and thus pointed out the way to the method of
Riemann of treating multi-dimensional, non-Euclidean continua. Thus it is
that mathematicians long ago solved the formal problems to which we are
led by the general postulate of relativity.

Page 94
XXV
GAUSSIAN CO-ORDINATES
According to Gauss, this combined analytical and geomet￾rical mode of handling the problem can be arrived at in the
following way. We imagine a system of arbitrary curves (see
Fig. 4) drawn on the surface of the table. These we designate
as u-curves, and we indicate each of them by means of a num￾ber. The curves u = 1, u = 2 and u = 3 are drawn in the
diagram. Between the curves u = 1 and u = 2 we must imagine
an infinitely large number to be drawn, all of which correspond
P
u = 1
u = 2
u = 3
v = 1
v = 2
v = 3
Fig. 4.
to real numbers lying between
1 and 2. We have then a sys￾tem of u-curves, and this “in￾finitely dense” system covers the
whole surface of the table. These
u-curves must not intersect each
other, and through each point
of the surface one and only one
curve must pass. Thus a perfectly
definite value of u belongs to ev￾ery point on the surface of the marble slab. In like manner we
imagine a system of v-curves drawn on the surface. These sat￾isfy the same conditions as the u-curves, they are provided with
numbers in a corresponding manner, and they may likewise be of
arbitrary shape. It follows that a value of u and a value of v be￾long to every point on the surface of the table. We call these two
numbers the co-ordinates of the surface of the table (Gaussian
co-ordinates). For example, the point P in the diagram has the
81

Page 95
RELATIVITY 82
Gaussian co-ordinates u = 3, v = 1. Two neighbouring points
P and P
′ on the surface then correspond to the co-ordinates
P : u, v
P
′
: u + du, v + dv,
where du and dv signify very small numbers. In a similar manner
we may indicate the distance (line-interval) between P and P
′
,
as measured with a little rod, by means of the very small num￾ber ds. Then according to Gauss we have
ds2 = g11 du2 + 2g12 du dv + g22 dv2
,
where g11, g12, g22, are magnitudes which depend in a perfectly
definite way on u and v. The magnitudes g11, g12 and g22 de￾termine the behaviour of the rods relative to the u-curves and
v-curves, and thus also relative to the surface of the table. For
the case in which the points of the surface considered form a
Euclidean continuum with reference to the measuring-rods, but
only in this case, it is possible to draw the u-curves and v-curves
and to attach numbers to them, in such a manner, that we sim￾ply have:
ds2 = du2 + dv2
.
Under these conditions, the u-curves and v-curves are straight
lines in the sense of Euclidean geometry, and they are perpen￾dicular to each other. Here the Gaussian co-ordinates are simply
Cartesian ones. It is clear that Gauss co-ordinates are nothing
more than an association of two sets of numbers with the points
of the surface considered, of such a nature that numerical val￾ues differing very slightly from each other are associated with
neighbouring points “in space.”

Page 96
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 83
So far, these considerations hold for a continuum of two di￾mensions. But the Gaussian method can be applied also to a
continuum of three, four or more dimensions. If, for instance,
a continuum of four dimensions be supposed available, we may
represent it in the following way. With every point of the con￾tinuum we associate arbitrarily four numbers, x1, x2, x3, x4,
which are known as “co-ordinates.” Adjacent points correspond
to adjacent values of the co-ordinates. If a distance ds is asso￾ciated with the adjacent points P and P
′
, this distance being
measurable and well-defined from a physical point of view, then
the following formula holds:
ds2 = g11 dx1
2 + 2g12 dx1 dx2 + · · · + g44 dx4
2
,
where the magnitudes g11, etc., have values which vary with the
position in the continuum. Only when the continuum is a Eu￾clidean one is it possible to associate the co-ordinates x1,. . . , x4
with the points of the continuum so that we have simply
ds2 = dx1
2 + dx2
2 + dx3
2 + dx4
2
.
In this case relations hold in the four-dimensional continuum
which are analogous to those holding in our three-dimensional
measurements.
However, the Gauss treatment for ds2 which we have given
above is not always possible. It is only possible when sufficiently
small regions of the continuum under consideration may be re￾garded as Euclidean continua. For example, this obviously holds
in the case of the marble slab of the table and local variation
of temperature. The temperature is practically constant for a
small part of the slab, and thus the geometrical behaviour of the

Page 97
RELATIVITY 84
rods is almost as it ought to be according to the rules of Eu￾clidean geometry. Hence the imperfections of the construction
of squares in the previous section do not show themselves clearly
until this construction is extended over a considerable portion
of the surface of the table.
We can sum this up as follows: Gauss invented a method
for the mathematical treatment of continua in general, in which
“size-relations” (“distances” between neighbouring points) are
defined. To every point of a continuum are assigned as many
numbers (Gaussian co-ordinates) as the continuum has dimen￾sions. This is done in such a way, that only one meaning can
be attached to the assignment, and that numbers (Gaussian
co-ordinates) which differ by an indefinitely small amount are
assigned to adjacent points. The Gaussian co-ordinate system
is a logical generalisation of the Cartesian co-ordinate system.
It is also applicable to non-Euclidean continua, but only when,
with respect to the defined “size” or “distance,” small parts of
the continuum under consideration behave more nearly like a
Euclidean system, the smaller the part of the continuum under
our notice.

Page 98
XXVI
THE SPACE-TIME CONTINUUM OF THE
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
CONSIDERED AS A EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM
We are now in a position to formulate more exactly the idea of
Minkowski, which was only vaguely indicated in Section XVII.
In accordance with the special theory of relativity, certain co￾ordinate systems are given preference for the description of
the four-dimensional, space-time continuum. We called these
“Galileian co-ordinate systems.” For these systems, the four
co-ordinates x, y, z, t, which determine an event or—in other
words—a point of the four-dimensional continuum, are defined
physically in a simple manner, as set forth in detail in the first
part of this book. For the transition from one Galileian system
to another, which is moving uniformly with reference to the first,
the equations of the Lorentz transformation are valid. These
last form the basis for the derivation of deductions from the
special theory of relativity, and in themselves they are nothing
more than the expression of the universal validity of the law of
transmission of light for all Galileian systems of reference.
Minkowski found that the Lorentz transformations satisfy
the following simple conditions. Let us consider two neighbour￾ing events, the relative position of which in the four-dimensional
continuum is given with respect to a Galileian reference-body K
by the space co-ordinate differences dx, dy, dz and the time￾difference dt. With reference to a second Galileian system we
shall suppose that the corresponding differences for these two
events are dx′
, dy′
, dz′
, dt′
. Then these magnitudes always fulfil
85

Page 99
RELATIVITY 86
the condition1
dx2 + dy2 + dz2 − c
2
dt2 = dx′2 + dy′2 + dz′2 − c
2
dt′2
.
The validity of the Lorentz transformation follows from this
condition. We can express this as follows: The magnitude
ds2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2 − c
2
dt2
,
which belongs to two adjacent points of the four-dimensional
space-time continuum, has the same value for all selected
(Galileian) reference-bodies. If we replace x, y, z,
√
−1 ct,
by x1, x2, x3, x4, we also obtain the result that
ds2 = dx1
2 + dx2
2 + dx3
2 + dx4
2
is independent of the choice of the body of reference. We call
the magnitude ds the “distance” apart of the two events or four￾dimensional points.
Thus, if we choose as time-variable the imaginary vari￾able √
−1 ct instead of the real quantity t, we can regard the
space-time continuum—in accordance with the special theory
of relativity—as a “Euclidean” four-dimensional continuum, a
result which follows from the considerations of the preceding
section.
1Cf. Appendices I and II. The relations which are derived there for the
co-ordinates themselves are valid also for co-ordinate differences, and thus
also for co-ordinate differentials (indefinitely small differences).

Page 100
XXVII
THE SPACE-TIME CONTINUUM OF THE
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY IS NOT A
EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM
In the first part of this book we were able to make use of space￾time co-ordinates which allowed of a simple and direct physical
interpretation, and which, according to Section XXVI, can be
regarded as four-dimensional Cartesian co-ordinates. This was
possible on the basis of the law of the constancy of the velocity
of light. But according to Section XXI, the general theory of
relativity cannot retain this law. On the contrary, we arrived
at the result that according to this latter theory the velocity of
light must always depend on the co-ordinates when a gravita￾tional field is present. In connection with a specific illustration
in Section XXIII, we found that the presence of a gravitational
field invalidates the definition of the co-ordinates and the time,
which led us to our objective in the special theory of relativity.
In view of the results of these considerations we are led to
the conviction that, according to the general principle of relativ￾ity, the space-time continuum cannot be regarded as a Euclidean
one, but that here we have the general case, corresponding to the
marble slab with local variations of temperature, and with which
we made acquaintance as an example of a two-dimensional con￾tinuum. Just as it was there impossible to construct a Cartesian
co-ordinate system from equal rods, so here it is impossible to
build up a system (reference-body) from rigid bodies and clocks,
which shall be of such a nature that measuring-rods and clocks,
arranged rigidly with respect to one another, shall indicate po￾87

Page 101
RELATIVITY 88
sition and time directly. Such was the essence of the difficulty
with which we were confronted in Section XXIII.
But the considerations of Sections XXV and XXVI show
us the way to surmount this difficulty. We refer the four￾dimensional space-time continuum in an arbitrary manner to
Gauss co-ordinates. We assign to every point of the continuum
(event) four numbers, x1, x2, x3, x4 (co-ordinates), which have
not the least direct physical significance, but only serve the
purpose of numbering the points of the continuum in a definite
but arbitrary manner. This arrangement does not even need
to be of such a kind that we must regard x1, x2, x3 as “space”
co-ordinates and x4 as a “time” co-ordinate.
The reader may think that such a description of the world
would be quite inadequate. What does it mean to assign to an
event the particular co-ordinates x1, x2, x3, x4, if in themselves
these co-ordinates have no significance? More careful consider￾ation shows, however, that this anxiety is unfounded. Let us
consider, for instance, a material point with any kind of motion.
If this point had only a momentary existence without duration,
then it would be described in space-time by a single system of
values x1, x2, x3, x4. Thus its permanent existence must be char￾acterised by an infinitely large number of such systems of values,
the co-ordinate values of which are so close together as to give
continuity; corresponding to the material point, we thus have
a (uni-dimensional) line in the four-dimensional continuum. In
the same way, any such lines in our continuum correspond to
many points in motion. The only statements having regard to
these points which can claim a physical existence are in real￾ity the statements about their encounters. In our mathematical
treatment, such an encounter is expressed in the fact that the

Page 102
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 89
two lines which represent the motions of the points in question
have a particular system of co-ordinate values, x1, x2, x3, x4, in
common. After mature consideration the reader will doubtless
admit that in reality such encounters constitute the only actual
evidence of a time-space nature with which we meet in physical
statements.
When we were describing the motion of a material point
relative to a body of reference, we stated nothing more than the
encounters of this point with particular points of the reference￾body. We can also determine the corresponding values of the
time by the observation of encounters of the body with clocks,
in conjunction with the observation of the encounter of the hands
of clocks with particular points on the dials. It is just the same
in the case of space-measurements by means of measuring-rods,
as a little consideration will show.
The following statements hold generally: Every physical
description resolves itself into a number of statements, each
of which refers to the space-time coincidence of two events
A and B. In terms of Gaussian co-ordinates, every such state￾ment is expressed by the agreement of their four co-ordinates
x1, x2, x3, x4. Thus in reality, the description of the time-space
continuum by means of Gauss co-ordinates completely replaces
the description with the aid of a body of reference, without
suffering from the defects of the latter mode of description; it
is not tied down to the Euclidean character of the continuum
which has to be represented.

Page 103
XXVIII
EXACT FORMULATION OF THE GENERAL
PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY
We are now in a position to replace the provisional formulation
of the general principle of relativity given in Section XVIII by
an exact formulation. The form there used, “All bodies of ref￾erence K, K′
, etc., are equivalent for the description of natural
phenomena (formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever
may be their state of motion,” cannot be maintained, because
the use of rigid reference-bodies, in the sense of the method fol￾lowed in the special theory of relativity, is in general not possible
in space-time description. The Gauss co-ordinate system has to
take the place of the body of reference. The following statement
corresponds to the fundamental idea of the general principle
of relativity: “All Gaussian co-ordinate systems are essentially
equivalent for the formulation of the general laws of nature.”
We can state this general principle of relativity in still an￾other form, which renders it yet more clearly intelligible than it
is when in the form of the natural extension of the special princi￾ple of relativity. According to the special theory of relativity, the
equations which express the general laws of nature pass over into
equations of the same form when, by making use of the Lorentz
transformation, we replace the space-time variables x, y, z, t,
of a (Galileian) reference-body K by the space-time variables
x
′
, y
′
, z
′
, t
′
, of a new reference-body K′
. According to the gen￾eral theory of relativity, on the other hand, by application of
arbitrary substitutions of the Gauss variables x1, x2, x3, x4, the
equations must pass over into equations of the same form; for
90

Page 104
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 91
every transformation (not only the Lorentz transformation) cor￾responds to the transition of one Gauss co-ordinate system into
another.
If we desire to adhere to our “old-time” three-dimensional
view of things, then we can characterise the development which
is being undergone by the fundamental idea of the general the￾ory of relativity as follows: The special theory of relativity has
reference to Galileian domains, i.e. to those in which no gravita￾tional field exists. In this connection a Galileian reference-body
serves as body of reference, i.e. a rigid body the state of motion
of which is so chosen that the Galileian law of the uniform rec￾tilinear motion of “isolated” material points holds relatively to
it.
Certain considerations suggest that we should refer the same
Galileian domains to non-Galileian reference-bodies also. A
gravitational field of a special kind is then present with respect
to these bodies (cf. Sections XX and XXIII).
In gravitational fields there are no such things as rigid bod￾ies with Euclidean properties; thus the fictitious rigid body of
reference is of no avail in the general theory of relativity. The
motion of clocks is also influenced by gravitational fields, and
in such a way that a physical definition of time which is made
directly with the aid of clocks has by no means the same degree
of plausibility as in the special theory of relativity.
For this reason non-rigid reference-bodies are used, which
are as a whole not only moving in any way whatsoever, but
which also suffer alterations in form ad lib. during their motion.
Clocks, for which the law of motion is of any kind, however irreg￾ular, serve for the definition of time. We have to imagine each
of these clocks fixed at a point on the non-rigid reference-body.

Page 105
RELATIVITY 92
These clocks satisfy only the one condition, that the “readings”
which are observed simultaneously on adjacent clocks (in space)
differ from each other by an indefinitely small amount. This
non-rigid reference-body, which might appropriately be termed
a “reference-mollusk,” is in the main equivalent to a Gaussian
four-dimensional co-ordinate system chosen arbitrarily. That
which gives the “mollusk” a certain comprehensibleness as com￾pared with the Gauss co-ordinate system is the (really unjus￾tified) formal retention of the separate existence of the space
co-ordinates as opposed to the time co-ordinate. Every point on
the mollusk is treated as a space-point, and every material point
which is at rest relatively to it as at rest, so long as the mollusk
is considered as reference-body. The general principle of rela￾tivity requires that all these mollusks can be used as reference￾bodies with equal right and equal success in the formulation of
the general laws of nature; the laws themselves must be quite
independent of the choice of mollusk.
The great power possessed by the general principle of rela￾tivity lies in the comprehensive limitation which is imposed on
the laws of nature in consequence of what we have seen above.

Page 106
XXIX
THE SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM OF
GRAVITATION ON THE BASIS OF THE
GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY
If the reader has followed all our previous considerations, he will
have no further difficulty in understanding the methods leading
to the solution of the problem of gravitation.
We start off from a consideration of a Galileian domain, i.e.
a domain in which there is no gravitational field relative to the
Galileian reference-body K. The behaviour of measuring-rods
and clocks with reference to K is known from the special theory
of relativity, likewise the behaviour of “isolated” material points;
the latter move uniformly and in straight lines.
Now let us refer this domain to a random Gauss co-ordinate
system or to a “mollusk” as reference-body K′
. Then with re￾spect to K′
there is a gravitational field G (of a particular kind).
We learn the behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks and also
of freely-moving material points with reference to K′
simply by
mathematical transformation. We interpret this behaviour as
the behaviour of measuring-rods, clocks and material points un￾der the influence of the gravitational field G. Hereupon we intro￾duce a hypothesis: that the influence of the gravitational field on
measuring-rods, clocks and freely-moving material points con￾tinues to take place according to the same laws, even in the case
when the prevailing gravitational field is not derivable from the
Galileian special case, simply by means of a transformation of
co-ordinates.
The next step is to investigate the space-time behaviour of
93

Page 107
RELATIVITY 94
the gravitational field G, which was derived from the Galileian
special case simply by transformation of the co-ordinates. This
behaviour is formulated in a law, which is always valid, no mat￾ter how the reference-body (mollusk) used in the description
may be chosen.
This law is not yet the general law of the gravitational field,
since the gravitational field under consideration is of a special
kind. In order to find out the general law-of-field of gravitation
we still require to obtain a generalisation of the law as found
above. This can be obtained without caprice, however, by taking
into consideration the following demands:
(a) The required generalisation must likewise satisfy the
general postulate of relativity.
(b) If there is any matter in the domain under considera￾tion, only its inertial mass, and thus according to Sec￾tion XV only its energy is of importance for its effect
in exciting a field.
(c) Gravitational field and matter together must satisfy
the law of the conservation of energy (and of impulse).
Finally, the general principle of relativity permits us to deter￾mine the influence of the gravitational field on the course of all
those processes which take place according to known laws when
a gravitational field is absent, i.e. which have already been fitted
into the frame of the special theory of relativity. In this connec￾tion we proceed in principle according to the method which has
already been explained for measuring-rods, clocks and freely￾moving material points.

Page 108
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 95
The theory of gravitation derived in this way from the gen￾eral postulate of relativity excels not only in its beauty; nor in
removing the defect attaching to classical mechanics which was
brought to light in Section XXI; nor in interpreting the empiri￾cal law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass; but it
has also already explained a result of observation in astronomy,
against which classical mechanics is powerless.
If we confine the application of the theory to the case where
the gravitational fields can be regarded as being weak, and in
which all masses move with respect to the co-ordinate system
with velocities which are small compared with the velocity of
light, we then obtain as a first approximation the Newtonian
theory. Thus the latter theory is obtained here without any
particular assumption, whereas Newton had to introduce the
hypothesis that the force of attraction between mutually at￾tracting material points is inversely proportional to the square
of the distance between them. If we increase the accuracy of the
calculation, deviations from the theory of Newton make their
appearance, practically all of which must nevertheless escape
the test of observation owing to their smallness.
We must draw attention here to one of these deviations. Ac￾cording to Newton’s theory, a planet moves round the sun in
an ellipse, which would permanently maintain its position with
respect to the fixed stars, if we could disregard the motion of
the fixed stars themselves and the action of the other planets
under consideration. Thus, if we correct the observed motion of
the planets for these two influences, and if Newton’s theory be
strictly correct, we ought to obtain for the orbit of the planet
an ellipse, which is fixed with reference to the fixed stars. This
deduction, which can be tested with great accuracy, has been

Page 109
RELATIVITY 96
confirmed for all the planets save one, with the precision that
is capable of being obtained by the delicacy of observation at￾tainable at the present time. The sole exception is Mercury, the
planet which lies nearest the sun. Since the time of Leverrier,
it has been known that the ellipse corresponding to the orbit of
Mercury, after it has been corrected for the influences mentioned
above, is not stationary with respect to the fixed stars, but that
it rotates exceedingly slowly in the plane of the orbit and in the
sense of the orbital motion. The value obtained for this rotary
movement of the orbital ellipse was 43 seconds of arc per cen￾tury, an amount ensured to be correct to within a few seconds
of arc. This effect can be explained by means of classical me￾chanics only on the assumption of hypotheses which have little
probability, and which were devised solely for this purpose.
On the basis of the general theory of relativity, it is found
that the ellipse of every planet round the sun must necessarily
rotate in the manner indicated above; that for all the planets,
with the exception of Mercury, this rotation is too small to be
detected with the delicacy of observation possible at the present
time; but that in the case of Mercury it must amount to 43 sec￾onds of arc per century, a result which is strictly in agreement
with observation.
Apart from this one, it has hitherto been possible to make
only two deductions from the theory which admit of being tested
by observation, to wit, the curvature of light rays by the grav￾itational field of the sun,1 and a displacement of the spectral
lines of light reaching us from large stars, as compared with the
corresponding lines for light produced in an analogous manner
1Observed by Eddington and others in 1919. (Cf. Appendix III.)

Page 110
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 97
terrestrially (i.e. by the same kind of molecule). I do not doubt
that these deductions from the theory will be confirmed also.

Page 111
PART III
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE UNIVERSE AS A
WHOLE
XXX
COSMOLOGICAL DIFFICULTIES OF NEWTON’S
THEORY
Apart from the difficulty discussed in Section XXI, there is
a second fundamental difficulty attending classical celestial me￾chanics, which, to the best of my knowledge, was first discussed
in detail by the astronomer Seeliger. If we ponder over the
question as to how the universe, considered as a whole, is to be
regarded, the first answer that suggests itself to us is surely this:
As regards space (and time) the universe is infinite. There are
stars everywhere, so that the density of matter, although very
variable in detail, is nevertheless on the average everywhere the
same. In other words: However far we might travel through
space, we should find everywhere an attenuated swarm of fixed
stars of approximately the same kind and density.
This view is not in harmony with the theory of Newton. The
latter theory rather requires that the universe should have a kind
of centre in which the density of the stars is a maximum, and
that as we proceed outwards from this centre the group-density
of the stars should diminish, until finally, at great distances, it is
succeeded by an infinite region of emptiness. The stellar universe
ought to be a finite island in the infinite ocean of space.1
1Proof —According to the theory of Newton, the number of “lines of
98

Page 112
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE UNIVERSE 99
This conception is in itself not very satisfactory. It is still less
satisfactory because it leads to the result that the light emitted
by the stars and also individual stars of the stellar system are
perpetually passing out into infinite space, never to return, and
without ever again coming into interaction with other objects
of nature. Such a finite material universe would be destined to
become gradually but systematically impoverished.
In order to escape this dilemma, Seeliger suggested a mod￾ification of Newton’s law, in which he assumes that for great
distances the force of attraction between two masses diminishes
more rapidly than would result from the inverse square law. In
this way it is possible for the mean density of matter to be con￾stant everywhere, even to infinity, without infinitely large grav￾itational fields being produced. We thus free ourselves from the
distasteful conception that the material universe ought to pos￾sess something of the nature of a centre. Of course we purchase
our emancipation from the fundamental difficulties mentioned,
at the cost of a modification and complication of Newton’s law
which has neither empirical nor theoretical foundation. We can
imagine innumerable laws which would serve the same purpose,
without our being able to state a reason why one of them is to
force” which come from infinity and terminate in a mass m is proportional to
the mass m. If, on the average, the mass-density ρ0 is constant throughout
the universe, then a sphere of volume V will enclose the average mass ρ0V .
Thus the number of lines of force passing through the surface F of the
sphere into its interior is proportional to ρ0V . For unit area of the surface
of the sphere the number of lines of force which enters the sphere is thus
proportional to ρ0
V
F
or to ρ0R. Hence the intensity of the field at the
surface would ultimately become infinite with increasing radius R of the
sphere, which is impossible.

Page 113
RELATIVITY 100
be preferred to the others; for any one of these laws would be
founded just as little on more general theoretical principles as is
the law of Newton.

Page 114
XXXI
THE POSSIBILITY OF A “FINITE” AND YET
“UNBOUNDED” UNIVERSE
But speculations on the structure of the universe also move in
quite another direction. The development of non-Euclidean ge￾ometry led to the recognition of the fact, that we can cast doubt
on the infiniteness of our space without coming into conflict with
the laws of thought or with experience (Riemann, Helmholtz).
These questions have already been treated in detail and with un￾surpassable lucidity by Helmholtz and Poincar´e, whereas I can
only touch on them briefly here.
In the first place, we imagine an existence in two-dimensional
space. Flat beings with flat implements, and in particular flat
rigid measuring-rods, are free to move in a plane. For them noth￾ing exists outside of this plane: that which they observe to hap￾pen to themselves and to their flat “things” is the all-inclusive
reality of their plane. In particular, the constructions of plane
Euclidean geometry can be carried out by means of the rods, e.g.
the lattice construction, considered in Section XXIV. In contrast
to ours, the universe of these beings is two-dimensional; but, like
ours, it extends to infinity. In their universe there is room for
an infinite number of identical squares made up of rods, i.e. its
volume (surface) is infinite. If these beings say their universe is
“plane,” there is sense in the statement, because they mean that
they can perform the constructions of plane Euclidean geometry
with their rods. In this connection the individual rods always
represent the same distance, independently of their position.
Let us consider now a second two-dimensional existence, but
101

Page 115
RELATIVITY 102
this time on a spherical surface instead of on a plane. The flat
beings with their measuring-rods and other objects fit exactly
on this surface and they are unable to leave it. Their whole uni￾verse of observation extends exclusively over the surface of the
sphere. Are these beings able to regard the geometry of their
universe as being plane geometry and their rods withal as the
realisation of “distance”? They cannot do this. For if they at￾tempt to realise a straight line, they will obtain a curve, which
we “three-dimensional beings” designate as a great circle, i.e. a
self-contained line of definite finite length, which can be mea￾sured up by means of a measuring-rod. Similarly, this universe
has a finite area that can be compared with the area of a square
constructed with rods. The great charm resulting from this con￾sideration lies in the recognition of the fact that the universe of
these beings is finite and yet has no limits.
But the spherical-surface beings do not need to go on a world￾tour in order to perceive that they are not living in a Euclidean
universe. They can convince themselves of this on every part of
their “world,” provided they do not use too small a piece of it.
Starting from a point, they draw “straight lines” (arcs of circles
as judged in three-dimensional space) of equal length in all di￾rections. They will call the line joining the free ends of these
lines a “circle.” For a plane surface, the ratio of the circum￾ference of a circle to its diameter, both lengths being measured
with the same rod, is, according to Euclidean geometry of the
plane, equal to a constant value π, which is independent of the
diameter of the circle. On their spherical surface our flat beings

Page 116
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE UNIVERSE 103
would find for this ratio the value
π =
sin  r
R

 r
R
 ,
i.e. a smaller value than π, the difference being the more consid￾erable, the greater is the radius of the circle in comparison with
the radius R of the “world-sphere.” By means of this relation
the spherical beings can determine the radius of their universe
(“world”), even when only a relatively small part of their world￾sphere is available for their measurements. But if this part is
very small indeed, they will no longer be able to demonstrate
that they are on a spherical “world” and not on a Euclidean
plane, for a small part of a spherical surface differs only slightly
from a piece of a plane of the same size.
Thus if the spherical-surface beings are living on a planet
of which the solar system occupies only a negligibly small part
of the spherical universe, they have no means of determining
whether they are living in a finite or in an infinite universe, be￾cause the “piece of universe” to which they have access is in both
cases practically plane, or Euclidean. It follows directly from
this discussion, that for our sphere-beings the circumference of
a circle first increases with the radius until the “circumference
of the universe” is reached, and that it thenceforward gradually
decreases to zero for still further increasing values of the radius.
During this process the area of the circle continues to increase
more and more, until finally it becomes equal to the total area
of the whole “world-sphere.”
Perhaps the reader will wonder why we have placed our “be￾ings” on a sphere rather than on another closed surface. But this

Page 117
RELATIVITY 104
choice has its justification in the fact that, of all closed surfaces,
the sphere is unique in possessing the property that all points on
it are equivalent. I admit that the ratio of the circumference c
of a circle to its radius r depends on r, but for a given value
of r it is the same for all points of the “world-sphere”; in other
words, the “world-sphere” is a “surface of constant curvature.”
To this two-dimensional sphere-universe there is a three￾dimensional analogy, namely, the three-dimensional spherical
space which was discovered by Riemann. Its points are likewise
all equivalent. It possesses a finite volume, which is determined
by its “radius” (2π
2R3
). Is it possible to imagine a spherical
space? To imagine a space means nothing else than that we
imagine an epitome of our “space” experience, i.e. of experience
that we can have in the movement of “rigid” bodies. In this
sense we can imagine a spherical space.
Suppose we draw lines or stretch strings in all directions from
a point, and mark off from each of these the distance r with a
measuring-rod. All the free end-points of these lengths lie on a
spherical surface. We can specially measure up the area (F) of
this surface by means of a square made up of measuring-rods.
If the universe is Euclidean, then F = 4πr2
; if it is spheri￾cal, then F is always less than 4πr2
. With increasing values
of r, F increases from zero up to a maximum value which is
determined by the “world-radius,” but for still further increas￾ing values of r, the area gradually diminishes to zero. At first,
the straight lines which radiate from the starting point diverge
farther and farther from one another, but later they approach
each other, and finally they run together again at a “counter￾point” to the starting point. Under such conditions they have
traversed the whole spherical space. It is easily seen that the

Page 118
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE UNIVERSE 105
three-dimensional spherical space is quite analogous to the two￾dimensional spherical surface. It is finite (i.e. of finite volume),
and has no bounds.
It may be mentioned that there is yet another kind of curved
space: “elliptical space.” It can be regarded as a curved space in
which the two “counter-points” are identical (indistinguishable
from each other). An elliptical universe can thus be considered
to some extent as a curved universe possessing central symmetry.
It follows from what has been said, that closed spaces with￾out limits are conceivable. From amongst these, the spherical
space (and the elliptical) excels in its simplicity, since all points
on it are equivalent. As a result of this discussion, a most inter￾esting question arises for astronomers and physicists, and that
is whether the universe in which we live is infinite, or whether it
is finite in the manner of the spherical universe. Our experience
is far from being sufficient to enable us to answer this question.
But the general theory of relativity permits of our answering it
with a moderate degree of certainty, and in this connection the
difficulty mentioned in Section XXX finds its solution.

Page 119
XXXII
THE STRUCTURE OF SPACE ACCORDING TO
THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
According to the general theory of relativity, the geomet￾rical properties of space are not independent, but they are de￾termined by matter. Thus we can draw conclusions about the
geometrical structure of the universe only if we base our con￾siderations on the state of the matter as being something that
is known. We know from experience that, for a suitably chosen
co-ordinate system, the velocities of the stars are small as com￾pared with the velocity of transmission of light. We can thus as
a rough approximation arrive at a conclusion as to the nature of
the universe as a whole, if we treat the matter as being at rest.
We already know from our previous discussion that the be￾haviour of measuring-rods and clocks is influenced by gravita￾tional fields, i.e. by the distribution of matter. This in itself
is sufficient to exclude the possibility of the exact validity of
Euclidean geometry in our universe. But it is conceivable that
our universe differs only slightly from a Euclidean one, and this
notion seems all the more probable, since calculations show that
the metrics of surrounding space is influenced only to an exceed￾ingly small extent by masses even of the magnitude of our sun.
We might imagine that, as regards geometry, our universe be￾haves analogously to a surface which is irregularly curved in its
individual parts, but which nowhere departs appreciably from a
plane: something like the rippled surface of a lake. Such a uni￾verse might fittingly be called a quasi-Euclidean universe. As
regards its space it would be infinite. But calculation shows
106

Page 120
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE UNIVERSE 107
that in a quasi-Euclidean universe the average density of mat￾ter would necessarily be nil. Thus such a universe could not
be inhabited by matter everywhere; it would present to us that
unsatisfactory picture which we portrayed in Section XXX.
If we are to have in the universe an average density of matter
which differs from zero, however small may be that difference,
then the universe cannot be quasi-Euclidean. On the contrary,
the results of calculation indicate that if matter be distributed
uniformly, the universe would necessarily be spherical (or ellip￾tical). Since in reality the detailed distribution of matter is not
uniform, the real universe will deviate in individual parts from
the spherical, i.e. the universe will be quasi-spherical. But it
will be necessarily finite. In fact, the theory supplies us with
a simple connection1 between the space-expanse of the universe
and the average density of matter in it.
1For the “radius” R of the universe we obtain the equation
R
2 =
2
κρ
.
The use of the C.G.S. system in this equation gives 2
κ
= 1.08 × 1027; is the
average density of the matter.

Page 121
APPENDIX I
SIMPLE DERIVATION OF THE LORENTZ
TRANSFORMATION [Supplementary to Section XI]
For the relative orientation of the co-ordinate systems indi￾cated in Fig. 2, the x-axes of both systems permanently coin￾cide. In the present case we can divide the problem into parts by
considering first only events which are localised on the x-axis.
Any such event is represented with respect to the co-ordinate
system K by the abscissa x and the time t, and with respect to
the system K′ by the abscissa x
′ and the time t
′
. We require to
find x
′ and t
′ when x and t are given.
A light-signal, which is proceeding along the positive axis
of x, is transmitted according to the equation
x = ct
or
x − ct = 0. (1)
Since the same light-signal has to be transmitted relative to K′
with the velocity c, the propagation relative to the system K′
will be represented by the analogous formula
x
′ − ct′ = 0. (2)
Those space-time points (events) which satisfy (1) must also
satisfy (2). Obviously this will be the case when the relation
(x
′ − ct′
) = λ(x − ct) (3)
108

Page 122
APPENDIX I 109
is fulfilled in general, where λ indicates a constant; for, according
to (3), the disappearance of (x − ct) involves the disappearance
of (x
′ − ct′
).
If we apply quite similar considerations to light rays which
are being transmitted along the negative x-axis, we obtain the
condition
(x
′ + ct′
) = µ(x + ct). (4)
By adding (or subtracting) equations (3) and (4), and in￾troducing for convenience the constants a and b in place of the
constants λ and µ, where
a =
λ + µ
2
and
b =
λ − µ
2
,
we obtain the equations
x
′ = ax − bct,
ct′ = act − bx.)
(5)
We should thus have the solution of our problem, if the con￾stants a and b were known. These result from the following
discussion.
For the origin of K′ we have permanently x
′ = 0, and hence
according to the first of the equations (5)
x =
bc
a
t.

Page 123
RELATIVITY 110
If we call v the velocity with which the origin of K′
is moving
relative to K, we then have
v =
bc
a
. (6)
The same value v can be obtained from equation (5), if we
calculate the velocity of another point of K′
relative to K, or the
velocity (directed towards the negative x-axis) of a point of K
with respect to K′
. In short, we can designate v as the relative
velocity of the two systems.
Furthermore, the principle of relativity teaches us that, as
judged from K, the length of a unit measuring-rod which is
at rest with reference to K′ must be exactly the same as the
length, as judged from K′
, of a unit measuring-rod which is at
rest relative to K. In order to see how the points of the x
′
-axis
appear as viewed from K, we only require to take a “snapshot”
of K′
from K; this means that we have to insert a particular
value of t (time of K), e.g. t = 0. For this value of t we then
obtain from the first of the equations (5)
x
′ = ax.
Two points of the x
′
-axis which are separated by the distance
∆x
′ = 1 when measured in the K′
system are thus separated in
our instantaneous photograph by the distance
∆x =
1
a
. (7)
But if the snapshot be taken from K′
(t
′ = 0), and if we
eliminate t from the equations (5), taking into account the ex-

Page 124
APPENDIX I 111
pression (6), we obtain
x
′ = a

1 −
v
2
c
2

x.
From this we conclude that two points on the x-axis and
separated by the distance 1 (relative to K) will be represented
on our snapshot by the distance
∆x
′ = a

1 −
v
2
c
2

. (7a)
But from what has been said, the two snapshots must be
identical; hence ∆x in (7) must be equal to ∆x
′
in (7a), so that
we obtain
a
2 =
1
1 −
v
2
c
2
. (7b)
The equations (6) and (7b) determine the constants a and b.
By inserting the values of these constants in (5), we obtain the
first and the fourth of the equations given in Section XI.
x
′ =
x − vt
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
,
t
′ =
t −
v
c
2
x
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
.



(8)
Thus we have obtained the Lorentz transformation for events
on the x-axis. It satisfies the condition
x
′2 − c
2
t
′2 = x
2 − c
2
t
2
. (8a)

Page 125
RELATIVITY 112
The extension of this result, to include events which take
place outside the x-axis, is obtained by retaining equations (8)
and supplementing them by the relations
y
′ = y,
z
′ = z.)
(9)
In this way we satisfy the postulate of the constancy of the
velocity of light in vacuo for rays of light of arbitrary direction,
both for the system K and for the system K′
. This may be
shown in the following manner.
We suppose a light-signal sent out from the origin of K at
the time t = 0. It will be propagated according to the equation
r =
p
x
2 + y
2 + z
2 = ct,
or, if we square this equation, according to the equation
x
2 + y
2 + z
2 − c
2
t
2 = 0. (10)
It is required by the law of propagation of light, in conjunc￾tion with the postulate of relativity, that the transmission of
the signal in question should take place—as judged from K′—in
accordance with the corresponding formula
r
′ = ct′
,
or,
x
′2 + y
′2 + z
′2 − c
2
t
′2 = 0. (10a)
In order that equation (10a) may be a consequence of equa￾tion (10), we must have
x
′2 + y
′2 + z
′2 − c
2
t
′2 = σ(x
2 + y
2 + z
2 − c
2
t
2
). (11)

Page 126
APPENDIX I 113
Since equation (8a) must hold for points on the x-axis, we
thus have σ = 1. It is easily seen that the Lorentz transformation
really satisfies equation (11) for σ = 1; for (11) is a consequence
of (8a) and (9), and hence also of (8) and (9). We have thus
derived the Lorentz transformation.
The Lorentz transformation represented by (8) and (9) still
requires to be generalised. Obviously it is immaterial whether
the axes of K′ be chosen so that they are spatially parallel to
those of K. It is also not essential that the velocity of translation
of K′ with respect to K should be in the direction of the x-axis.
A simple consideration shows that we are able to construct the
Lorentz transformation in this general sense from two kinds of
transformations, viz. from Lorentz transformations in the spe￾cial sense and from purely spatial transformations, which corre￾sponds to the replacement of the rectangular co-ordinate system
by a new system with its axes pointing in other directions.
Mathematically, we can characterise the generalised Lorentz
transformation thus:
It expresses x
′
, y
′
, z
′
, t
′
, in terms of linear homogeneous func￾tions of x, y, z, t, of such a kind that the relation
x
′2 + y
′2 + z
′2 − c
2
t
′2 = x
2 + y
2 + z
2 − c
2
t
2
(11a)
is satisfied identically. That is to say: If we substitute their
expressions in x, y, z, t, in place of x
′
, y
′
, z
′
, t
′
, on the left-hand
side, then the left-hand side of (11a) agrees with the right-hand
side.

Page 127
APPENDIX II
MINKOWSKI’S FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE (“WORLD”)
[Supplementary to Section XVII]
We can characterise the Lorentz transformation still more sim￾ply if we introduce the imaginary √
−1 · ct in place of t, as time￾variable. If, in accordance with this, we insert
x1 = x,
x2 = y,
x3 = z,
x4 =
√
−1 · ct,
and similarly for the accented system K′
, then the condition
which is identically satisfied by the transformation can be ex￾pressed thus:
x
′2
1 + x
′2
2 + x
′2
3 + x
′2
4 = x1
2 + x2
2 + x3
2 + x4
2
. (12)
That is, by the afore-mentioned choice of “co-ordinates,”
(11a) is transformed into this equation.
We see from (12) that the imaginary time co-ordinate x4
enters into the condition of transformation in exactly the same
way as the space co-ordinates x1, x2, x3. It is due to this fact
that, according to the theory of relativity, the “time” x4 enters
into natural laws in the same form as the space co-ordinates
x1, x2, x3.
A four-dimensional continuum described by the “co-ordi￾nates” x1, x2, x3, x4, was called “world” by Minkowski, who
114

Page 128
APPENDIX II 115
also termed a point-event a “world-point.” From a “happen￾ing” in three-dimensional space, physics becomes, as it were, an
“existence” in the four-dimensional “world.”
This four-dimensional “world” bears a close similarity to the
three-dimensional “space” of (Euclidean) analytical geometry.
If we introduce into the latter a new Cartesian co-ordinate sys￾tem (x
′
1
, x′
2
, x′
3
) with the same origin, then x
′
1
, x
′
2
, x
′
3
, are linear
homogeneous functions of x1, x2, x3, which identically satisfy
the equation
x
′2
1 + x
′2
2 + x
′2
3 = x1
2 + x2
2 + x3
2
.
The analogy with (12) is a complete one. We can regard
Minkowski’s “world” in a formal manner as a four-dimensional
Euclidean space (with imaginary time co-ordinate); the Lorentz
transformation corresponds to a “rotation” of the co-ordinate
system in the four-dimensional “world.”

Page 129
APPENDIX III
THE EXPERIMENTAL CONFIRMATION OF THE
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
From a systematic theoretical point of view, we may imagine
the process of evolution of an empirical science to be a continu￾ous process of induction. Theories are evolved and are expressed
in short compass as statements of a large number of individual
observations in the form of empirical laws, from which the gen￾eral laws can be ascertained by comparison. Regarded in this
way, the development of a science bears some resemblance to the
compilation of a classified catalogue. It is, as it were, a purely
empirical enterprise.
But this point of view by no means embraces the whole of
the actual process; for it slurs over the important part played
by intuition and deductive thought in the development of an
exact science. As soon as a science has emerged from its initial
stages, theoretical advances are no longer achieved merely by a
process of arrangement. Guided by empirical data, the investi￾gator rather develops a system of thought which, in general, is
built up logically from a small number of fundamental assump￾tions, the so-called axioms. We call such a system of thought a
theory. The theory finds the justification for its existence in the
fact that it correlates a large number of single observations, and
it is just here that the “truth” of the theory lies.
Corresponding to the same complex of empirical data, there
may be several theories, which differ from one another to a con￾siderable extent. But as regards the deductions from the theo￾ries which are capable of being tested, the agreement between
116

Page 130
APPENDIX III 117
the theories may be so complete, that it becomes difficult to
find such deductions in which the two theories differ from each
other. As an example, a case of general interest is available in
the province of biology, in the Darwinian theory of the develop￾ment of species by selection in the struggle for existence, and in
the theory of development which is based on the hypothesis of
the hereditary transmission of acquired characters.
We have another instance of far-reaching agreement between
the deductions from two theories in Newtonian mechanics on
the one hand, and the general theory of relativity on the other.
This agreement goes so far, that up to the present we have been
able to find only a few deductions from the general theory of
relativity which are capable of investigation, and to which the
physics of pre-relativity days does not also lead, and this despite
the profound difference in the fundamental assumptions of the
two theories. In what follows, we shall again consider these
important deductions, and we shall also discuss the empirical
evidence appertaining to them which has hitherto been obtained.
(a) Motion of the Perihelion of Mercury
According to Newtonian mechanics and Newton’s law of gravi￾tation, a planet which is revolving round the sun would describe
an ellipse round the latter, or, more correctly, round the common
centre of gravity of the sun and the planet. In such a system,
the sun, or the common centre of gravity, lies in one of the foci
of the orbital ellipse in such a manner that, in the course of a
planet-year, the distance sun-planet grows from a minimum to
a maximum, and then decreases again to a minimum. If instead
of Newton’s law we insert a somewhat different law of attraction

Page 131
RELATIVITY 118
into the calculation, we find that, according to this new law, the
motion would still take place in such a manner that the distance
sun-planet exhibits periodic variations; but in this case the an￾gle described by the line joining sun and planet during such a
period (from perihelion—closest proximity to the sun—to peri￾helion) would differ from 360◦
. The line of the orbit would not
then be a closed one, but in the course of time it would fill up
an annular part of the orbital plane, viz. between the circle of
least and the circle of greatest distance of the planet from the
sun.
According also to the general theory of relativity, which dif￾fers of course from the theory of Newton, a small variation from
the Newton-Kepler motion of a planet in its orbit should take
place, and in such a way, that the angle described by the radius
sun-planet between one perihelion and the next should exceed
that corresponding to one complete revolution by an amount
given by
+
24π
3a
2
T
2c
2
(1 − e
2
)
.
(N.B.—One complete revolution corresponds to the angle 2π
in the absolute angular measure customary in physics, and the
above expression gives the amount by which the radius sun￾planet exceeds this angle during the interval between one peri￾helion and the next.) In this expression a represents the major
semi-axis of the ellipse, e its eccentricity, c the velocity of light,
and T the period of revolution of the planet. Our result may
also be stated as follows: According to the general theory of
relativity, the major axis of the ellipse rotates round the sun
in the same sense as the orbital motion of the planet. Theory

Page 132
APPENDIX III 119
requires that this rotation should amount to 43 seconds of arc
per century for the planet Mercury, but for the other planets of
our solar system its magnitude should be so small that it would
necessarily escape detection.1
In point of fact, astronomers have found that the theory
of Newton does not suffice to calculate the observed motion of
Mercury with an exactness corresponding to that of the deli￾cacy of observation attainable at the present time. After tak￾ing account of all the disturbing influences exerted on Mercury
by the remaining planets, it was found (Leverrier—1859—and
Newcomb—1895) that an unexplained perihelial movement of
the orbit of Mercury remained over, the amount of which does
not differ sensibly from the above-mentioned +43 seconds of arc
per century. The uncertainty of the empirical result amounts to
a few seconds only.
(b) Deflection of Light by a Gravitational Field
In Section XXII it has been already mentioned that, according
to the general theory of relativity, a ray of light will experience a
curvature of its path when passing through a gravitational field,
this curvature being similar to that experienced by the path of
a body which is projected through a gravitational field. As a
result of this theory, we should expect that a ray of light which
is passing close to a heavenly body would be deviated towards
the latter. For a ray of light which passes the sun at a distance
of ∆ sun-radii from its centre, the angle of deflection (α) should
1Especially since the next planet Venus has an orbit that is almost an
exact circle, which makes it more difficult to locate the perihelion with
precision.

Page 133
RELATIVITY 120
amount to
α =
1.7 seconds of arc
∆
.
It may be added that, according to the theory, half of this deflec￾tion is produced by the Newtonian field of attraction of the sun,
and the other half by the geometrical modification (“curvature”)
of space caused by the sun.
S
E
D1
D2
D1
z
∆}| {
Fig. 5.
This result admits of an experimental test
by means of the photographic registration of
stars during a total eclipse of the sun. The only
reason why we must wait for a total eclipse is
because at every other time the atmosphere is
so strongly illuminated by the light from the
sun that the stars situated near the sun’s disc
are invisible. The predicted effect can be seen
clearly from the accompanying diagram. If the
sun (S) were not present, a star which is practi￾cally infinitely distant would be seen in the di￾rection D1, as observed from the earth. But as
a consequence of the deflection of light from the
star by the sun, the star will be seen in the di￾rection D2, i.e. at a somewhat greater distance
from the centre of the sun than corresponds to its real position.
In practice, the question is tested in the following way. The
stars in the neighbourhood of the sun are photographed during
a solar eclipse. In addition, a second photograph of the same
stars is taken when the sun is situated at another position in
the sky, i.e. a few months earlier or later. As compared with the
standard photograph, the positions of the stars on the eclipse￾photograph ought to appear displaced radially outwards (away

Page 134
APPENDIX III 121
from the centre of the sun) by an amount corresponding to the
angle α.
We are indebted to the Royal Society and to the Royal As￾tronomical Society for the investigation of this important deduc￾tion. Undaunted by the war and by difficulties of both a material
and a psychological nature aroused by the war, these societies
equipped two expeditions—to Sobral (Brazil), and to the island
of Principe (West Africa)—and sent several of Britain’s most
celebrated astronomers (Eddington, Cottingham, Crommelin,
Davidson), in order to obtain photographs of the solar eclipse
of 29th May, 1919. The relative discrepancies to be expected
between the stellar photographs obtained during the eclipse and
the comparison photographs amounted to a few hundredths of
a millimetre only. Thus great accuracy was necessary in making
the adjustments required for the taking of the photographs, and
in their subsequent measurement.
The results of the measurements confirmed the theory in a
thoroughly satisfactory manner. The rectangular components
of the observed and of the calculated deviations of the stars (in
seconds of arc) are set forth in the following table of results:
Number of
the Star.
First Co-ordinate.
z }| {
Observed. Calculated.
Second Co-ordinate.
z }| {
Observed. Calculated.
11 −0.19 −0.22 +0.16 +0.02
5 +0.29 +0.31 −0.46 −0.43
4 +0.11 +0.10 +0.83 +0.74
3 +0.20 +0.12 +1.00 +0.87
6 +0.10 +0.04 +0.57 +0.40
10 −0.08 +0.09 +0.35 +0.32
2 +0.95 +0.85 −0.27 −0.09

Page 135
RELATIVITY 122
(c) Displacement of Spectral Lines towards the Red
In Section XXIII it has been shown that in a system K′ which
is in rotation with regard to a Galileian system K, clocks of
identical construction, and which are considered at rest with
respect to the rotating reference-body, go at rates which are
dependent on the positions of the clocks. We shall now examine
this dependence quantitatively. A clock, which is situated at a
distance r from the centre of the disc, has a velocity relative
to K which is given by
v = ωr,
where ω represents the angular velocity of rotation of the disc K′
with respect to K. If ν0 represents the number of ticks of the
clock per unit time (“rate” of the clock) relative to K when the
clock is at rest, then the “rate” of the clock (ν) when it is moving
relative to K with a velocity v, but at rest with respect to the
disc, will, in accordance with Section XII, be given by
ν = ν0
r
1 −
v
2
c
2
,
or with sufficient accuracy by
ν = ν0

1 −
1
2
v
2
c
2

.
This expression may also be stated in the following form:
ν = ν0

1 −
1
c
2
ω
2
r
2
2

.
If we represent the difference of potential of the centrifugal force
between the position of the clock and the centre of the disc by ϕ,

Page 136
APPENDIX III 123
i.e. the work, considered negatively, which must be performed
on the unit of mass against the centrifugal force in order to
transport it from the position of the clock on the rotating disc
to the centre of the disc, then we have
ϕ = −
ω
2
r
2
2
.
From this it follows that
ν = ν0

1 +
ϕ
c
2

.
In the first place, we see from this expression that two clocks of
identical construction will go at different rates when situated at
different distances from the centre of the disc. This result is also
valid from the standpoint of an observer who is rotating with
the disc.
Now, as judged from the disc, the latter is in a gravitational
field of potential ϕ, hence the result we have obtained will hold
quite generally for gravitational fields. Furthermore, we can
regard an atom which is emitting spectral lines as a clock, so
that the following statement will hold:
An atom absorbs or emits light of a frequency which is de￾pendent on the potential of the gravitational field in which it is
situated.
The frequency of an atom situated on the surface of a heav￾enly body will be somewhat less than the frequency of an atom
of the same element which is situated in free space (or on the
surface of a smaller celestial body). Now ϕ = −K
M
r
, where
K is Newton’s constant of gravitation, and M is the mass of the

Page 137
RELATIVITY 124
heavenly body. Thus a displacement towards the red ought to
take place for spectral lines produced at the surface of stars as
compared with the spectral lines of the same element produced
at the surface of the earth, the amount of this displacement
being
ν0 − ν
ν0
=
K
c
2
M
r
.
For the sun, the displacement towards the red predicted by
theory amounts to about two millionths of the wave-length. A
trustworthy calculation is not possible in the case of the stars,
because in general neither the mass M nor the radius r is known.
It is an open question whether or not this effect exists, and
at the present time astronomers are working with great zeal to￾wards the solution. Owing to the smallness of the effect in the
case of the sun, it is difficult to form an opinion as to its exis￾tence. Whereas Grebe and Bachem (Bonn), as a result of their
own measurements and those of Evershed and Schwarzschild on
the cyanogen bands, have placed the existence of the effect al￾most beyond doubt, other investigators, particularly St. John,
have been led to the opposite opinion in consequence of their
measurements.
Mean displacements of lines towards the less refrangible end
of the spectrum are certainly revealed by statistical investiga￾tions of the fixed stars; but up to the present the examination of
the available data does not allow of any definite decision being
arrived at, as to whether or not these displacements are to be
referred in reality to the effect of gravitation. The results of ob￾servation have been collected together, and discussed in detail
from the standpoint of the question which has been engaging
our attention here, in a paper by E. Freundlich entitled “Zur

Page 138
APPENDIX III 125
Pr¨ufung der allgemeinen Relativit¨ats-Theorie” (Die Naturwis￾senschaften, 1919, No. 35, p. 520: Julius Springer, Berlin).
At all events, a definite decision will be reached during the
next few years. If the displacement of spectral lines towards the
red by the gravitational potential does not exist, then the general
theory of relativity will be untenable. On the other hand, if the
cause of the displacement of spectral lines be definitely traced to
the gravitational potential, then the study of this displacement
will furnish us with important information as to the mass of the
heavenly bodies.

Page 139
BIBLIOGRAPHY
WORKS IN ENGLISH ON EINSTEIN’S THEORY
Introductory
The Foundations of Einstein’s Theory of Gravitation: Erwin
Freundlich (translation by H. L. Brose). Camb. Univ.
Press, 1920.
Space and Time in Contemporary Physics: Moritz Schlick
(translation by H. L. Brose). Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1920.
The Special Theory
The Principle of Relativity: E. Cunningham. Camb. Univ.
Press.
Relativity and the Electron Theory: E. Cunningham, Mono￾graphs on Physics. Longmans, Green & Co.
The Theory of Relativity: L. Silberstein. Macmillan & Co.
The Space-Time Manifold of Relativity: E. B. Wilson and
G. N. Lewis, Proc. Amer. Soc. Arts & Science, vol. xlviii.,
No. 11, 1912.
The General Theory
Report on the Relativity Theory of Gravitation: A. S. Eddington.
Fleetway Press Ltd., Fleet Street, London.
126

Page 140
BIBLIOGRAPHY 127
On Einstein’s Theory of Gravitation and its Astronomical Con￾sequences: W. de Sitter, M. N. Roy. Astron. Soc., lxxvi.
p. 699, 1916; lxxvii. p. 155, 1916; lxxviii. p. 3, 1917.
On Einstein’s Theory of Gravitation: H. A. Lorentz, Proc. Am￾sterdam Acad., vol. xix. p. 1341, 1917.
Space, Time and Gravitation: W. de Sitter: The Observatory,
No. 505, p. 412. Taylor & Francis, Fleet Street, London.
The Total Eclipse of 29th May, 1919, and the Influence of Grav￾itation on Light: A. S. Eddington, ibid., March 1919.
Discussion on the Theory of Relativity: M. N. Roy. Astron. Soc.,
vol. lxxx. No. 2, p. 96, December 1919.
The Displacement of Spectrum Lines and the Equivalence Hy￾pothesis: W. G. Duffield, M. N. Roy. Astron. Soc.,
vol. lxxx. No. 3, p. 262, 1920.
Space, Time and Gravitation: A. S. Eddington, Camb. Univ.
Press, 1920.
Also, Chapters in
The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism: J. H.
Jeans (4th edition). Camb. Univ. Press, 1920.
The Electron Theory of Matter : O. W. Richardson. Camb.
Univ. Press.

Page 141
INDEX
Aberration, 47
Absorption of energy, 44
Acceleration, 60, 62, 65
Action at a distance, 46
Addition of velocities, 15, 36
Adjacent points, 83
Aether, 50
— -drift, 50
Arbitrary substitutions, 90
Astronomical day, 10
Astronomy, 6, 95
Axioms, 1, 116
— truth of, 1
Bachem, 124
Basis of theory, 42
“Being”, 62, 101
β-rays, 48
Biology, 117
Cartesian system of
co-ordinates, 6, 78, 114
Cathode rays, 48
Celestial mechanics, 98
Centrifugal force, 73, 123
Chest, 62
Classical mechanics, 8, 12, 15,
28, 42, 67, 95, 96, 116
— truth of, 12
Clocks, 9, 21, 74, 75, 87, 89,
91–94, 106, 122
— rate of, 122
Conception of mass, 43
— position, 5
Conservation of energy, 43, 94
— impulse, 94
— mass, 43, 45
Continuity, 88
Continuum, 52, 77
— Euclidean, 78, 79, 82, 86
— four-dimensional, 83, 85, 87,
114
— non-Euclidean, 79, 84
— space-time, 72, 85–89
— three-dimensional, 53
— two-dimensional, 87
Co-ordinate
— differences, 85
— differentials, 85
— planes, 29
Cottingham, 121
Counter-Point, 104
Co-variant, 40
Crommelin, 121
Curvature of light-rays, 96, 119
— space, 119
Curvilinear motion, 69
Cyanogen bands, 124
128

Page 142
INDEX 129
Darwinian theory, 116
Davidson, 121
Deductive thought, 116
Derivation of laws, 42
De Sitter, 16
Displacement of spectral lines,
96, 122
Distance (line-interval), 3, 4, 7,
26, 78, 82, 101
— physical interpretation of, 4
— relativity of, 26
Doppler principle, 47
Double stars, 16
Eclipse of star, 16
Eddington, 96, 121
Electricity, 71
Electrodynamics, 12, 18, 39, 42,
71
Electromagnetic theory, 47
— waves, 59
Electron, 42, 48
— electrical masses of, 48
Electrostatics, 71
Elliptical space, 105
Empirical laws, 116
Encounter (space-time
coincidence), 89
Equivalent, 13
Euclidean geometry, 1, 2, 54,
76, 79, 82, 101, 106, 114
— propositions of, 3, 7
Euclidean space, 54, 79, 114
Evershed, 124
Experience, 47, 56
Faraday, 46, 59
FitzGerald, 50
Fixed stars, 10
Fizeau, 37, 47, 49
— experiment of, 37
Frequency of atom, 123
Galilei, 10
— transformation, 31, 34, 36,
40, 49
Galileian system of
co-ordinates, 10, 11, 13,
44, 73, 85, 91, 93
Gauss, 79, 81, 84
Gaussian co-ordinates, 81–84,
88–93
General theory of relativity,
55–97
Geometrical ideas, 2, 3
— propositions, 1
— truth of, 1–3
Gravitation, 59, 65, 72, 95
Gravitational field, 59, 63, 69,
72, 87, 91, 93, 106
— potential of, 123
Gravitational mass, 61, 64, 95
Grebe, 124
Group-density of stars, 98

Page 143
RELATIVITY 130
Helmholtz, 101
Heuristic value of relativity, 40
Induction, 116
Inertia, 61
Inertial mass, 45, 60, 64, 94, 95
Instantaneous photograph
(snapshot), 110
Intensity of gravitational field,
99
Intuition, 116
Ions, 42
Kepler, 118
Kinetic energy, 42, 94
Lattice, 101
Law of inertia, 10, 56, 57, 91
Laws of Galilei-Newton, 11
— of Nature, 55, 67, 91
Leverrier, 96, 119
Light-signal, 32, 108, 112
Light-stimulus, 32
Limiting velocity (c), 34, 35
Lines of force, 99
Lorentz, H. A., 18, 39, 42,
47–50
— transformation, 31, 37, 40,
85, 90, 91, 108, 111, 113,
114
— — (generalised), 113
Mach, E., 68
Magnetic field, 59
Manifold, see Continuum
Mass of heavenly bodies, 125
Matter, 94
Maxwell, 39, 42, 46–49
— fundamental equations, 44,
71
Measurement of length, 78
Measuring-rod, 4, 5, 26, 74, 75,
87, 93, 94, 104, 106, 110
Mercury, 96, 119
— orbit of, 96, 119
Michelson, 50–51
Minkowski, 52–54, 85, 115
Morley, 50, 51
Motion, 13, 55
— of heavenly bodies, 11, 13,
42, 95, 106
Newcomb, 119
Newton, 10, 68, 95, 98, 117
Newton’s
— constant of gravitation, 123
— law of gravitation, 46, 74,
99, 117
— law of motion, 60
Non-Euclidean geometry, 101
Non-Galileian reference-bodies,
91
Non-uniform motion, 58

Page 144
INDEX 131
Optics, 12, 18, 42
Organ-pipe, note of, 13
Parabola, 8, 9
Path-curve, 9
Perihelion of Mercury, 117–119
Physics, 6
— of measurement, 6
Place specification, 4, 5
Plane, 1, 101
Poincar´e, 101
Point, 1
Point-mass, energy of, 43
Position, 8
Principle of relativity, 12–14,
18, 55
Processes of Nature, 40
Propagation of light, 16–18, 29,
85, 112
— in gravitational fields, 69
— in liquid, 37
Quasi-Euclidean universe, 107
Quasi-spherical universe, 107
Radiation, 44
Radioactive substances, 48
Reference-body, 4, 6, 8–10, 16,
21, 23, 24, 35, 55
— rotating, 73
Reference-mollusk, 92–94
Relative
— position, 3
— velocity, 110
Rest, 13
Riemann, 80, 101, 104
Rotation, 74, 115
Schwarzschild, 124
Seconds-clock, 34
Seeliger, 98, 99
Simultaneity, 19, 21–24, 75
— relativity of, 24
Size-relations, 84
Solar eclipse, 70, 120
Space, 8, 49, 52, 98
— conception of, 18
— -interval, 28, 53
— -point, 92
— three-dimensional, 114
— two-dimensional, 101
Space co-ordinates, 52, 75, 92
Special theory of relativity,
1–54
Spherical
— space, 104, 105
— surface, 102
St. John, 124
Stellar universe, 98
— photographs, 120
Straight line, 1–3, 8, 76, 82, 102
System of co-ordinates, 4, 8, 10

Page 145
RELATIVITY 132
Terrestrial space, 14
Theory, 116
— truth of, 116
Three-dimensional, 52
Time
— conception of, 18, 49, 98
— co-ordinate, 52, 91
— in Physics, 19, 91, 114
— of an event, 21, 24
Time-interval, 28, 53
Trajectory, 9
“Truth”, 2
Uniform translation, 11, 55
Universe
— elliptical, 105, 106
— Euclidean, 101, 103
— space expanse (radius) of,
106
— spherical, 103, 106
Universe (World) structure of,
101, 106
— circumference of, 103
Value of π, 76, 102
Velocity of light, 9, 16, 17, 70,
112
Venus, 119
Weight (heaviness), 61
World, 52, 102, 114
— -point, 114
— -radius, 104
— -sphere, 103
Zeeman, 38

Page 146
PRINTED BY
MORRISON AND GIBB LIMITED
EDINBURGH

Page 147
LICENSING I
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RELATIVITY ***
***** This file should be named 36114-pdf.pdf or 36114-pdf.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/1/1/36114/
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ‘Project
Gutenberg’), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all

Page 148
LICENSING II
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.
1.B. ‘Project Gutenberg’ is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (‘the
Foundation’ or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

Page 149
LICENSING III
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase ‘Project Gutenberg’ appears, or with which the
phrase ‘Project Gutenberg’ is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase ‘Project
Gutenberg’ associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access

Page 150
LICENSING IV
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than ‘Plain Vanilla ASCII’ or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original ‘Plain
Vanilla ASCII’ or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:
* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, ‘Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.’
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project

Page 151
LICENSING V
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain ‘Defects,’ such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ‘Right
of Replacement or Refund’ described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth

Page 152
LICENSING VI
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you--‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Page 153
LICENSING VII
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Page 154
LICENSING VIII
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
